<!-- -*- mode: markdown -*- -->

corpus-iuris
============

Resources for the study of Roman and canon law...

Think of the files associated with this project as being under
continuous development: they are ever-changing,
[org-mode friendly](http://orgmode.org), versions of the main texts
pertaining to classical Roman and canon law along with various related
'tools'.  Many more texts await their conversion to plain text, but
this is what I know of for now.

I used `org-mode` because I primarily use
[GNU Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) when I interact with
text files, and `org-mode` is reason enough to use Emacs.  For large,
but structured documents, `org-mode` is great because it lets you
toggle the visibility of sections and subsections of texts, so you
can, e.g., show only the main sections of a file (say, only the titles
of the file codex-01.txt).  If you don't know what I'm talking about
you're missing out.  But until you make the switch yourself, note that
`org-mode` is still plain ASCII or UTF-8 (or, I suppose, your encoding
of choice), which means if your operating system and/or text editor
doesn't know how to handle the `.org` extension, just change it to
`.txt` and all will be well.  (But, really, just use Emacs: it makes
dealing with these kinds of large text files *much* more convenient!)


## Canon Law

### Decretales (Liber extra)

Source: [Decretalium Gregorii papae IX compilationis libri V](http://www.hs-augsburg.de/~harsch/Chronologia/Lspost13/GregoriusIX/gre_0000.html)

The texts are based on the version of the *Liber extra* as it is found
on the Biblioteca Augustana website, which includes other texts of
[Gregory IX](http://www.hs-augsburg.de/~harsch/Chronologia/Lspost13/GregoriusIX/gre_intr.html).
I downloaded these texts several years ago, and I include in the
belief that the raw text of the *Decretales* surely belongs to the
pubic domain by now.


## Roman Law


### Latin

Source:  [The Latin Library](http://thelatinlibrary.com/ius.html)

I downloaded these texts from the source above an uncertain number of
years ago, and converted them into plain text at different times in a
variety of ways.  Depending upon what I am working on, these texts are
'improved' in greater and lesser ways at varying rates.  It is
believed that the original HTML versions are in the public domain, and
are therefore available for modification.

Note that I rarely have occasion to look at or use classical Roman law
sources that were unavailable in the middle ages, which means that
texts like Gaius' *Institutes* found here are virtually untouched and
I make no claims about their general usability.  Ideally that will one
day change, but caveat lector.

Another word of warning regarding these texts: when the original text
was published in Greek, these files either have incoherent
transliterations of the Greek text, which I assume derives initially
from the scanning process, or are simply omitted completely.  Some of
these passages have been fixed, but most have not.  However, now that
they are publicly available, I shall try to be more diligent about
fixing the files.

### English

Source: [The Civil Law](http://www.constitution.org/sps/sps.htm)

S. P. Scott translated, in seventeen volumes, as it says on the
website give above, 'The Twelve Tables, The Institutes of Gaius, The
Rules of Ulpian, The Opinions of Paulus, The Enactments of Justinian,
and The Constitutions of Leo'.  Although the translation has not
received universal praise, it is still convenient.  (For the *Novels*,
see the
[Annotated Justinian Code](http://www.uwyo.edu/lawlib/justinian%2Dnovels/),
hosted by the [University of Wyoming](http://www.uwyo.edu/) --- an
excellent resource, which includes a superior translation of the
*Code*.)

There are problems with the text as scanned and converted into HTML,
and thus with my conversion into plain text.  The most significant is
that the footnotes of the translation are embedded directly into the
text and so one must be careful about untangling the two.  I continue
to fix these problems as I come across them, but I do not use these
texts as much as the Latin versions, so progress is much slower.

For medievalists, however, there is one advantage to this translation,
however: because Scott did not use the Krueger edition of the *Code*,
his translation also includes the *authenticae* and the *Constitutions
of Frederick* as they are found in vulgate editions of the *Code*.
This is a nice addition.


## Contributions

If you download or clone or whatever these texts and end up making
improvements, please consider submitting your changes so others can
benefit in the future.  These texts can greatly facilitate the ways we
can access and search the texts of classical canon and Roman law, and
so it makes sense to make them as reliable and as easy of access as
possible.

Contributions of other texts, or other resources such as
reverse-lookup tools, would be great as well.
