# -*- mode: org -*-

# -*- mode: org -*-

I. THE LAWS OF THE TWELVE TABLES


* TABLE I. Concerning the summons to court.

Law I.

When anyone summons another before the tribunal of a judge, the latter
must, without hesitation, immediately appear.^[1]^

Law II.

If, after having been summoned, he does not appear, or refuses to come
before the tribunal of the judge, let the party who summoned him call
upon any citizens who are present to bear witness.^[2]^ Then let him
seize his reluctant adversary; so that he may be brought into court, as
a captive, by apparent force.

Law III.

When anyone who has been summoned to court is guilty of evasion, or
attempts to flee, let him be arrested by the plaintiff.

Law IV.

If bodily infirmity or advanced age should prevent the party summoned to
court from appearing, let him who summoned him furnish him with an
animal, as a means of transport. If he is unwilling to accept it, the
plaintiff cannot legally be compelled to provide the defendant with a
vehicle constructed of boards, or a covered litter.^[3]^

^[1]^ Under the Roman method of procedure, until the thorough
organization of the judicial system by the emperors, service of summons
was always made by the plaintiff in the action. This was even sometimes
done after the custom of regularly appointing court officials for that
purpose had been established. — Ed.

^[2]^ Notification of the bystanders was made to show that the arrest of
the defendant was to compel his appearance before the tribunal, a
proceeding authorized by law; and not to insult him, or forcibly
restrain him of his liberty, which might form the ground of prosecution
for an illegal act. — Ed.

^[3]^ Litters were originally used exclusively by women and sick persons
during the early ages of Greece and Rome. They, afterwards, in the time
of the Empire, became a favorite mode of conveyance with the Romans, and
especially with the wealthy nobles, who vied with one another in the
profuse and costly decoration of their luxurious *lecticæ*, upholstered
in silk, embellished with ebony, ivory, and lazulite, and glittering
with precious stones and gold. The *sella*, one form of the litter, was
almost identical with the sedan chair of the eighteenth century. The
vehicle referred to in the text was probably a public one, like our cabs
and carriages for hire. — Ed.

Law V.

If he who is summoned has either a sponsor or a defender, let him be
dismissed, and his representative can take his place in court.^[1]^

Law VI.

The defender, or the surety of a wealthy man, must himself be rich; but
anyone who desires to do so can come to the assistance of a person who
is poor, and occupy his place.

Law VII.

When litigants wish to settle their dispute among themselves, even while
they are on their way to appear before the Prætor, they shall have the
right to make peace; and whatever agreement they enter into, it shall be
considered just, and shall be confirmed.

Law VIII.

If the plaintiff and defendant do not settle their dispute, as above
mentioned, let them state their cases either in the *Comitium* or the
Forum, by making a brief statement in the presence of the judge, between
the rising of the sun and noon; and, both of them being present, let
them speak so that each party may hear.

Law IX.

In the afternoon, let the judge grant the right to bring the action, and
render his decision in the presence of the plaintiff and the defendant.

Law X.

The setting of the sun shall be the extreme limit of time within which a
judge must render his decision.

* TABLE II. Concerning judgments and thefts.

Law I.

When issue has been joined in the presence of the judge, sureties and
their substitutes for appearance at the trial must be furnished on both
sides. The parties shall appear in person, unless prevented by disease
of a serious character; or where vows which they have taken must be
discharged to the Gods; or where the proceedings are interrupted through
their absence on business for the State; or where a day has been
appointed by them to meet an alien.

^[1]^ From this it will be seen that the office of defensor, or
"defender," of the party sued was one of the most ancient recognized by
Roman jurisprudence. Its duties were often undertaken without
solicitation, through motives of friendship or compassion, or the
influence of family ties; and, as the defendant's representative, he
occupied the legal position of the former, including the unqualified
assumption of all his liabilities arising from, or dependent upon the
matter in litigation. — Ed.

Law II.

If any of the above mentioned occurrences takes place, that is, if one
of the parties is seriously ill, or a vow has to be performed, or one of
them is absent on business for the State, or a day has been appointed
for an interview with an alien, so that the judge, the arbiter, or the
defendant is prevented from being present, and the furnishing of
security is postponed on this account, the hearing of the case shall be
deferred.

Law III.

Where anyone is deprived of the evidence of a witness let him call him
with a loud voice in front of his house, on three market-days.

Law IV.

Where anyone commits a theft by night, and having been caught in the act
is killed, he is legally killed.^[1]^

^[1]^ While the ordinary presumption certainly arises that no one can
encounter a desperate malefactor in his house at night without incurring
risk of serious injury; still, the Roman jurists, in enacting this
provision, evidently had in view the prevention of homicide except when
absolutely necessary, even under circumstances which might justify
almost any violent act in the defence of life and property. Other
lawgivers, generally speaking, did not recognize such nice distinctions.

The rule, somewhat modified, has been adopted by the majority of
subsequent judicial systems as being thoroughly consonant with the
principles of justice. It was incorporated, with but slight alteration,
into the Visigothic Code, and Las *Siete Partidas. "Fur nocturnus captus
in furto, dum res furtivas secum portare conatur, si fuerit occisus,
mors eius nullo modo vindicetur." (Forum Judicum*, VII, II, 16.) "*Otro
tal decimos quo seria, si algun one /allasse algun ladron de noche en su
casa, e lo quisiesse prender para darlo a la justicia del lugar, si el
ladron se amparasse con armas. Ca entonce, si lo matare, non cæ por esso
en pena." (Las Siete Partidas,*VII, VIII, 3.) As stated above, to render
the modicide justifiable, the Visigoths required that the thief should
be in possession of the stolen property; and the Castilian law provided
that he should be armed and resist arrest while in the house of the
owner. Under the law of Athens, a thief taken *flagrante delicto*, at
night, could be killed with impunity. (Potter, Antiquities of Greece, I,
24, 126.)

With the Jews, homicide was not punishable when the culprit was killed
under circumstances essential to constitute the crime known to us as
burglary. "If a thief be found breaking up, and he be smitten that he
die. no blood shall be shed for him; but if the sun be risen upon him,
there shall blood be shed for him; for he should have made full
restitution." (Exodus XXII, 2.)

With the Anglo-Saxons, a thief caught in the act, at any time, either by
day or by night, could be slain with impunity. "He who slays a thief
must declare on oath that he slew him offending." (Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England; Laws of King Ine, 16.)

This principle does not appear to have been accepted in the earliest age
of the Common Law. Glanvil does not mention it. Bracton, however, refers
to it as being sound, and applicable by day or by night, without regard
to place, if the homicide, at the time, could not avoid serious personal
injury. "*Qui latronem occiderit, non tenetur, nocturnum vel diurnum, si
aliter periculum evadere non possit*." (Bracton, *De Legibus et
Covsuetudinibus Angliæ*, III, 155, 36.)

Fleta says: "*Quicunqiie enim furem nocturnum interfecerit, non
teneatur, & qui invasorem domus suæ, se ipsum & hospitium suum saltem
illa hora defendendo interfecerit, juste interficit*." (Fleta,
*Commentarius Juris Anglicanæ*, I, XXIII, 14.) This applied not only to
a burglar, but to anyone found in the "curtilage," or enclosure
containing the residence, at any hour between nine P. M. and six A. M.;
and under these conditions, homicide was authorized either in
self-defense, or when it occurred in an attempt to arrest the intruder,
or was committed in order to prevent his escape. The necessity for the
homicide must be absolute in order to render it justifiable. "*Si
necessitas evitabilis fuerit, absque occasione, reus est homicidii, qui
si fuerit inevitabilis, ad pœnam homicidii non tenebitur, eo quod
felonice non occidit." (Ibid*. I, 23.) It is held by Coke that the act
of killing must be in self-defence, and be preceded by violent
aggression on the part of the thief. "If a thiefe offer to rob or murder
B, either abroad or in his house, and thereupon assault him, and B,
defend himself without any giving back, and in his defence killeth the
thiefe; this is no felony." (Coke, Institutes of the Laws of England,
Vol. IV, Ch. 8.)

This doctrine is explicitly set forth in Stat. 24, Hen. VIII, Chap. 5.
"If any person do attempt to break any mansion-house in the night time,
and shall happen to be slain by any person or persons, etc. (tho a
lodger or servant) they shall upon their trial be acquitted and
discharged." The above mentioned Statute, as is held by a high
authority, may be construed to apply to an illegal act of this kind
committed during the day with felonious intent "It seems it extends not
to a braking the house in the day-time, unless it be such a braking, as
imports with it, apparent robbery, or an intention or attempt thereof."
(Hale, The History of the Pleas of the Crown, I, XL, Page 488.)

This was also the rule in Scotland, "It is lawful to kill a Thief, who
in the night offers to break our Houses, or steal our Goods, even though
he defend not himself, because we know not but he designs against our
Life; and Murder may be easily committed upon us in the night, but it is
not lawful to kill a Thief who steals in the day time, except he resist
us when we offer to take him, and present him to Justice." (Mackenzie,
The Laws and Customes of Scotland in Matters Criminal, I, XI, III.) The
general rule, while well established, was formerly, to a certain extent,
so far as its application is concerned, largely dependent upon the
circumstances of each particular case. No distinction was made between
an invasion of the house and an attack upon the person, provided the
alarm experienced by the homicide was considered to be so well founded
as to justify his act. In some respects great latitude was allowed the
injured party. "The same right of defending our property, may also
justify our killing a thief, or predonious invader, in the act of
running away with our goods, if he cannot otherwise be taken, or the
goods secured." (Burnett, A Treatise on the Criminal Law of Scotland, I,
page 57.)

The laws of France and Italy excuse the homicide of an intruder who
commits burglary or theft with violence. (*Code Pénal de France*, III,
II, Arts. 322, 329.) (*Codice Penale*, II, III, Art. 376.)

In the United States, killing is only justifiable where the crime could
not otherwise have been prevented, and where force is employed. When an
attempt is made to commit a secret felony, without violence, the right
does not exist. It is different, however, where the precincts of a man's
home are invaded in the daytime, or at night. "An attack on a house or
its inmates may be resisted by taking life. This may be when burglars
threaten an entrance, or when there is apparent ground to believe that a
felonious assault is to be made on any of the inmates of the house, or
when an attempt is made violently to enter the house in defiance of the
owner's rights."

"But this right is only one of prevention. It cannot be extended so as
to excuse the killing of persons not actually breaking into or violently
threatening a house." (Wharton, A Treatise on Criminal Law, Secs. 629,
630, 634, 635.) — Ed.

Law V.

If anyone commits a theft during the day, and is caught in the act, he
shall be scourged, and given up as a slave to the person against whom
the theft was committed. If he who perpetrated the theft is a slave, he
shall be beaten with rods and hurled from the Tarpeian Rock.^[1]^ If he
is under the age of puberty, the Prætor shall decide whether he shall be
scourged, and surrendered by way of reparation for the injury.

Law VI.

When any persons commit a theft during the day and in the light, whether
they be freemen or slaves, of full age or minors, and attempt to defend
themselves with weapons, or with any kind of implements; and the party
against whom the violence is committed raises the cry of thief, and
calls upon other persons, if any are present, to come to his assistance;
and this is done, and the thieves are killed by him in the defence of
his person and property, it is legal, and no liability attaches to the
homicide.

Law VII.

If a theft be detected by means of a dish and a girdle, it is the same
as manifest theft, and shall be punished as such.^[2]^

^[1]^ This mode of punishment was considered especially ignominious by
the Romans, and was usually inflicted upon traitors.

"The rock Tarpeian, Fittest goal for treason's race, The promontory
whence the traitor's leap Cured all ambition." — Ed.

^[2]^ Various explanations have been suggested for the elucidation of
this obscure passage. It has been supposed by some that a dish,
perforated with two holes for the eyes, was carried by the thief to hide
his face and conceal his identity; the girdle being intended for the
removal of the booty. Others have advanced the theory that religious
impostors, masquerading as members of the priesthood, passed the dish
for the collection of money for alleged sacrificial purposes, and
appropriated the amounts obtained to their own use. A few have
maintained that the dish was employed to hold a piece of bread which had
been subjected to certain magic ceremonies, and, for this reason
compelled the thief to confess as soon as he had eaten it, a species of
ordeal, as it were. The most plausible interpretation of the *furtum per
lancem et licium refertum* is, however, that when the officer appointed
for that purpose entered a house to seek for property which had been
stolen, he was required to be naked, except for a girdle, and to hold a
dish before his face, as a concession to the modesty of any woman he
might encounter. The owner of the property was also entitled to make
search under the same conditions. Nakedness was regarded as necessary in
order to avoid anything being carried into the house which might afford
ground for a false accusation. — Ed.

Law VIII.

When anyone accuses and convicts another of theft which is not manifest,
and no stolen property is found, judgment shall be rendered to compel
the thief to pay double the value of what was stolen.

Law IX.

Where anyone secretly cuts down trees belonging to another, he shall pay
twenty-five *asses* for each tree cut down.

Law X.

Where anyone, in order to favor a thief, makes a compromise for the loss
sustained, he cannot afterwards prosecute him for theft.

Law XI.

Stolen property shall always be his to whom it formerly belonged; nor
can the lawful owner ever be deprived of it by long possession, without
regard to its duration; nor can it ever be acquired by another, no
matter in what way this may take place.^[1]^

* TABLE III. Concerning property which is lent.

Law I.

When anyone, with fraudulent intent, appropriates property deposited
with him for safe keeping, he shall be condemned to pay double its
value.

Law II.

When anyone collects interest on money loaned at a higher rate per annum
than that of the *unciæ*, he shall pay quadruple the amount by way of
penalty.^[2]^

^[1]^ This doctrine as set forth in the maxim "*Spoliatus debet, ante
omnia, restitui*," is recognized by the courts of all civilized, and
most semi-barbarous nations. — Ed.

^[2]^ The rate of interest authorized by law at Rome was, despite
statutory regulations, often a matter of avarice on one side and
necessity on the other. Money lenders were accustomed to wring from
distressed borrowers the last *sesterce* which heartless rapacity and
extortion could exact. The rate was usually dependent upon agreement,
and while the collection of compound interest was illegal, a bond for
the increase of what was in arrears was sometimes required, which
amounted to the same thing.

As shown by the text, the Twelve Tables forbade anything in excess of
the *unciarum fœmus*, or interest on the twelve "ounces" into which the
*as*, the integral amount representing capital for one year, as well as
an estate when its assets were estimated for distribution, were divided.
The term, however, is ambiguous, and has been interpreted in several
ways. The best authorities hold that ten per cent is the rate referred
to. — Ed.

Law III.

An alien cannot acquire the property of another by usucaption; but a
Roman citizen, who is the lawful owner of the property, shall always
have the right to demand it from him.

Law IV.

Where anyone, having acknowledged a debt, has a judgment rendered
against him requiring payment, thirty days shall be given to him in
which to pay the money and satisfy the judgment.

Law V.

After the term of thirty days granted by the law to debtors who have had
judgment rendered against them has expired, and in the meantime, they
have not satisfied the judgment, their creditors shall be permitted to
forcibly seize them and bring them again into court.

Law VI.

When a defendant, after thirty days have elapsed, is brought into court
a second time by the plaintiff, and does not satisfy the judgment; or,
in the meantime, another party, or his surety does not pay it out of his
own money, the creditor, or the plaintiff, after the debtor has been
delivered up to him, can take the latter with him and bind him or place
him in fetters; provided his chains are not of more than fifteen pounds
weight; he can, however, place him in others which are lighter, if he
desires to do so.

Law VII.

If, after a debtor has been delivered up to his creditor, or has been
placed in chains, he desires to obtain food and has the means, he shall
be permitted to support himself out of his own property. But if he has
nothing on which to live, his creditor, who holds him in chains, shall
give him a pound of grain every day, or he can give him more than a
pound, if he wishes to do so.

Law VIII.

In the meantime, the party who has been delivered up to his creditor can
make terms with him. If he does not, he shall be kept in chains for
sixty days; and for three consecutive market-days he shall be brought
before the Prætor in the place of assembly in the Forum, and the amount
of the judgment against him shall be publicly proclaimed.

Law IX.

After he has been kept in chains for sixty days, and the sum for which
he is liable has been three times publicly proclaimed in the Forum, he
shall be condemned to be reduced to slavery by him to whom he was
delivered up; or, if the latter prefers, he can be sold beyond the
Tiber.

Law X.

Where a party is delivered up to several persons, on account of a debt,
after he has been exposed in the Forum on three market days, they shall
be permitted to divide their debtor into different parts, if they desire
to do so; and if anyone of them should, by the division, obtain more or
less than he is entitled to, he shall not be responsible.^[1]^

* TABLE IV. Concerning the rights of a father, and of marriage.

Law I.

A father shall have the right of life and death over his son born in
lawful marriage, and shall also have the power to render him
independent, after he has been sold three times.^[2]^

^[1]^ While a strict construction of the provisions of this law has been
rejected by some jurists, there can be little doubt that its abhorrent
features, far worse than those of the famous claim of Shylock, were
susceptible of literal interpretation, and that the partition of the
body of the unfortunate debtor was entirely dependent upon the
inclination of his creditors to whom he had been adjudged. The statement
of Aulus Gellius relative to a fact evidently well known to his
countrymen, would seem to be conclusive upon this point. "*Nam, si
plures forent, quibus reus esset judicatur, secare si vellent, atque
partiri corpus addicti sibi hominis permiserunt*." (Aul. Gell. *Nodes
Atticæ*. I. XX. 1.) Fabius, alluding to the same law, says that public
sentiment was opposed to its enforcement. "*Quam legem mos publicus
repudiavit*." In view of the eminent authority of these Roman writers,
and the clear meaning of the text, the opinion entertained by some
respectable commentators, that the word "*secare*," "to divide," merely
has reference to the apportionment of the debtor's property, is hardly
tenable, as it must have been already taken in execution and divided,
before his person was delivered up to gratify the resentment of his
disappointed creditors. — Ed.

^[2]^ This privilege, the *patria potestas*, enjoyed by Roman fathers,
was a relic of the patriarchal authority originally asserted by a man
over his household, including the members of his immediate family, his
slaves, and other dependents. Derived from ancient custom, it continued
to exist for centuries after Rome had attained an exalted rank in the
scale of civilization, and other practices of barbarous origin and
primitive character had long been abandoned. It is said by Justinian
(Code VI, 26) to have been an institution peculiar to the Romans; for
while other nations possessed authority over their children unlimited by
any legislative provision, few of their regulations bore even a distant
resemblance to those which confirmed the Roman father in the exercise of
his unquestioned and arbitrary power, the *jus vitæ et necis*. This
power in early times was unbounded, and usually endured through life.

A marked peculiarity of this relation was what was known as the *unitas
personæ*, under which a father and his son subject to his control were,
by means of a legal fiction, held to be but a single person in law.
Hence, when the father died, the son at once succeeded him; for the
reason that, during his father's lifetime he had been a joint owner of
the undivided estate. Despite the *unitas personæ*, the child was
strictly not a person but a thing, one of the *res mancipi*, which by
quiritarian right could be sold by the owner. The father was authorized
to make any disposition of his offspring that he chose; he could
scourge, maim, imprison, torture, or execute them at his pleasure. Nor
was this right infrequently or sparingly exercised; the Roman annals are
full of instances where sons were inhumanly treated and put to death by
their fathers.

The acquisition of the *patria potestas* was dependent upon the status
of the parent at the time of the birth of the child; he must be free, or
*sui juris*, to be entitled to exercise paternal control, for if he were
subject to the authority of another ascendant, his child would also come
under the power of the latter.

Under ordinary circumstances, a son could acquire no property for
himself, all he obtained belonged to his father. Exceptions were
subsequently made in the cases of private, independent ownership of what
was received by him while preparing for, or engaged in military service,
or as a member of the priesthood; and finally of all acquisitions
derived from maternal or other inheritances, or which were the
remuneration of his individual labor or skill. This species of property
designated *peculium castrense*, and *quasi peculium castrense*, was the
subject of numerous Imperial enactments, which, in the course of time,
afforded substantial relief to children oppressed by this legalized
tyranny; as the censors, in the time of the Republic, had frequently
exerted their authority for the same purpose.

*Patria potestas* was a necessary incident of lawful wedlock, which
indeed was indispensable; and the authority thereby obtained was imposed
on all the descendants through the son, but did not affect the offspring
of a daughter who was subject to the *paterfamilias* of the family into
which she had married. In addition to birth, paternal power could be
acquired by means of the public acknowledgment of legitimacy, by
adoption, and by matrimony.

As a natural result of placing children in the same category with slaves
and domestic animals, liable to sale, barter, and the most cruel abuse,
there was a time at which a child could be given up to the injured party
by way of reparation for some unlawful act, or *noxa*, which it had
committed; a practice condemned by Justinian in unmeasured terms.

It was not until about 370, during the reign of Valentinian and Valens,
that measures were taken to place restrictions upon the irresponsible
power of the head of the household; an example which was followed by
many succeeding emperors. The sentiment expressed by Hadrian in
condemning to exile a father who had killed his son, discloses the
change of public opinion with which the excessive exercise of -paternal
authority was, even in that day, regarded. "*Patria potestas in pietate
debet, non in atrocitate, consistere*."

This right, in a greatly modified form, and relating principally to the
obligations of obedience and support, is explicitly recognized by the
jurisprudence of Continental Europe. — Ed.

Law II.

If a father sells his son three times, the latter shall be free from
paternal authority.

Law III.

A father shall immediately put to death a son recently born, who is a
monster, or has a form different from that of members of the human race.

Law IV.

When a woman brings forth a son within the next ten months after the
death of her husband, he shall be born in lawful marriage, and shall be
the legal heir of his estate.^[1]^

^[1]^ At Common Law, the time prescribed was forty weeks. "*Et si ele
eyt un enfant dedens t's XL semaines adõques soit cel enfant receu el
heritage*." (Britton, Chap. 66, p. 166.) The countries whose
jurisprudence is directly derived from that of Rome, as well as Japan,
follow the rule of the text, and fix the limit at three hundred days.
(*Code Civil de France*, Art. 315. *Código Civil de España*, Art. 108.
*Codice Civile de Italia*, Art. 160. *Codigo Civil Portugues*, Art. 101.
*Civil Code of*

* TABLE V. Concerning estates and guardianships.

Law I.

No matter in what way the head of a household may dispose of his estate,
and appoint heirs to the same, or guardians; it shall have the force and
effect of law.^[1]^

*Japan*. Art. 820.) According to Moslem law, the presumption of
legitimacy may be established at any time from six lunar months —
adopted as the shortest period of gestation — to two years. (*Syed Ameer
AU*, Mohammedan Law, Vol. II. II, 2, p. 191.) As is well known, the
Civil Law maxim, "*Pater est quem nuptiæ demonstrant*," is not accepted
by the Common Law, which requires the birth to precede the marriage in
every instance. The law of Scotland coincides with that of Rome on both
the above-mentioned points. (More, Lectures on the Laws of Scotland,
Vol. I, Chap. I. Sec. II.) — Ed.

^[1]^ This law, which placed the distribution of his estate absolutely
in the hands of the testator, without regard to the natural claims of
consanguinity, was strictly observed for centuries. The abuse to which
the privilege was liable became in time so flagrant that various
measures were introduced to correct it. If the legacies bequeathed were
large enough to include all, or so much of the assets as to render the
remainder undesirable or burdensome, the estate was forthwith rejected
by the heir. This act invalidated the will, and the heir-at-law took
possession, the legacies being, of course, no longer of any effect. To
obviate the confusion and injustice resulting from this proceeding, the
Tribunal of the Centumviri devised the *querela inofficiosi testamenti*,
or complaint of inofficious testament; by means of which the will was
declared void on account of the mental incapacity of the testator, which
was considered to be established *prima facie* by the existence of the
clause of disinheritance. The *Lex Furia Testamentaria* limited the
amount of a bequest to the insignificant sum of one thousand asses,
which the ingenuity of testators evaded by simply increasing the number
of legacies.

The *Lex Voconia*, passed A. U. C. 594, prohibited any legatee from
accepting a bequest which exceeded in value the amount obtained by the
heir. Women were also discriminated against by this law, presumably to
prevent the affection of the testator from being indulged in their favor
at the expense of members of his family; as well as to avoid the
excessive accumulation of property in the hands of persons generally
considered as ill-qualified to make a proper use of it.

The *Lex Voconia* having proved ineffective, the *Lex Falcidia,*by which
the previous enactments on this subject were repealed, was introduced
one hundred and twenty years later. It provided that the heir, should,
under ordinary circumstances, be entitled to one-fourth of the estate
after all claims had been paid; and that no legacy should exceed
three-fourths of the amount of the same. In case this rule was violated,
the heir was authorized to diminish the bequests *pro rata*, until the
sum to which he was entitled was made up. This apportionment, known as
the "*Quarta Falcidia*," or "*Falcidian Fourth*," has, without
substantial change, under the name of "*legitime*," been incorporated
into much of the jurisprudence of Europe. It is in force in Louisiana,
where it exists in favor of all direct descendants, and of ascendants in
the first degree. "Donations *inter vivos* or *mortis causa* cannot
exceed two thirds of the property of the disposer, if he leaves at his
decease a legitimate child; one half, if he leaves two children, and one
third, if he leaves three or a greater number." (Civil Code of
Louisiana, Arts. 1480, 1481.) With the exception of the above-mentioned
State, no similar restraints are, in this country, imposed upon the
testamentary disposition of property, which is, of course, always
subject to the dower of the widow. The same rule prevails in England. —
Ed.

Law II.

Where a father dies intestate, without leaving any proper heir, his
nearest agnate, or, if there is none, the next of kin among his family,
shall be his heir. '

Law III.

When a freedman dies intestate, and does not leave any proper heir, but
his patron, or the children of the latter survive him; the inheritance
of the estate of the freedman shall be adjudged to the next of kin of
the patron.

Law IV.

When a creditor or a debtor dies, his heirs can only sue, or be sued, in
proportion to their shares in the estate; and any claims, or remaining
property, shall be divided among them in the same proportion.

Law V.

Where co-heirs desire to obtain their shares of the property of an
estate, which has not yet been divided, it shall be divided. In order
that this may be properly done and no loss be sustained by the
litigants, the Prætor shall appoint three arbiters, who can give to each
one that to which he is entitled in accordance with law and equity.

Law VI.

When the head of a family dies intestate, and leaves a proper heir who
has not reached the age of puberty, his nearest agnate shall obtain the
guardianship.^[1]^

Law VII.

When no guardian has been appointed for an insane person, or a
spendthrift, his nearest agnates, or if there are none, his other
relatives, must take charge of his property.

^[1]^ This was done under the presumption that the person most closely
connected with the minor by the ties of consanguinity, and being next in
the order of succession and hence directly interested in the
preservation of the estate, would be most likely to properly discharge
the duties of the trust. The English doctrine, which coincides with that
adopted by the Greeks at the instance of Solon, is directly the
opposite. It excludes from guardianship those who could, under any
circumstances, become heirs, and therefore evinced a preference for
cognates. The temptation to foul play to which the next of kin to the
minor was supposed to be liable, is stated by the early English jurists
in very energetic language. "*Nunquam enim custodia alicujus de jure
alicui remanet, de quo habeatur suspicio quod possit vel velit aliquod
jus in ipsa, hereditate clamare*." (Glanvil VII, II.) Coke compares a
guardian of this description to a ravening wolf: "*quasi agnem
committere lupo ad devorandum*," are the terms in which he characterizes
such an appointment. (Coke Inst. I. 88.) — Ed.

* TABLE VI. Concerning ownership and possession.

Law I.

When anyone contracts a legal obligation with reference to his property,
or sells it, by making a verbal statement or agreement concerning the
same, this shall have the force and effect of law. If the party should
afterwards deny his statements, and legal proceedings are instituted, he
shall, by way of penalty, pay double the value of the property in
question.

Law II.

Where a slave is ordered to be free by a will, upon his compliance with
a certain condition, and he complies with the condition; or if, after
having paid his price to the purchaser, he claims his liberty, he shall
be free.

Law III.

Where property has been sold, even though it may have been delivered, it
shall by no means be acquired by the purchaser until the price has been
paid, or a surety or a pledge has been given, and the vendor satisfied
in this manner.

Law IV.

Immovable property shall be acquired by usucaption after the lapse of
two years; other property after the lapse of one year.

Law V.

Where a woman, who has not been united to a man in marriage, lives with
him for an entire year without the usucaption of her being interrupted
for three nights, she shall pass into his power as his legal wife.^[1]^

Law VI.

Where parties have a dispute with reference to property before the
tribunal of the Prætor, both of them shall be permitted to state their
claims in the presence of witnesses.

Law VII.

Where anyone demands freedom for another against the claim of servitude,
the Prætor shall render judgment in favor of liberty.

^[1]^ This indicates the existence of woman as a mere chattel to be
acquired by uninterrupted possession and use for a year, like any other
species of personal property. It has been stated, with much probability,
that this kind of matrimonial union was the most common and popular one
in the early days of Rome. Our Common Law marriage authorized by some
States, and which requires the public acknowledgment of the woman as a
wife, bears a considerable analogy, in certain respects, to the
cohabitation, *matrimonii causa*, of the text. — Ed.

Law VIII.

No material forming part of either a building or a vineyard shall be
removed therefrom. Any one who, without the knowledge or consent of the
owner, attaches a beam or anything else to his house or vineyard, shall
be condemned to pay double its value.

Law IX.

Timbers which have been dressed and prepared for building purposes, but
which have not yet been attached to a building or a vineyard can legally
be recovered by the owner, if they are stolen from him.

Law X.

If a husband desires to divorce his wife, and dissolve his marriage, he
must give a reason for doing so.

* TABLE VII. Concerning crimes.

Law I.

If a quadruped causes injury to anyone, let the owner tender him the
estimated amount of the damage; and if he is unwilling to accept it, the
owner shall, by way of reparation, surrender the animal that caused the
injury.^[1]^

Law II.

If you cause any unlawful damage . . . .^[2]^ accidentally and
unintentionally, you must make good the loss, either by tendering what
has caused it, or by payment.

Law III.

Anyone who, by means of incantations and magic arts, prevents grain or
crops of any kind belonging to another from growing, shall be sacrificed
to Ceres.^[3]^

This was the origin of the proceedings growing out of *noxa*, an
injurious or unlawful act committed by an animal, a slave, or a child
under paternal control, for which the owner, master, or parent was held
responsible. Whatever caused the damage was held to be primarily liable,
under the rule, "*omnes noxales actiones caput sequntur*"; hence the
injured party had a right to seize the offending animal or slave, and
hold it as security until his claim was satisfied; which has an exact
parallel in the case of a stray found upon the premises of another, and
detained or impounded under the English or American law. At first, in
neither instance, could me author of the damage be sold, or the injury
be otherwise redressed; this defect was, however, subsequently remedied
by the passage at Rome of the *Lex Aquilia*, which granted an action
directly against the owner; and by the enactment of the Statutes 5 & 6
Wm. IV. which permitted a sale of the animal in question, after certain
legal formalities had been complied with. The American law is similar. —
Ed.

^[2]^ Original manuscript illegible.

^[3]^ The intimate association of religion with law in the early life of
Rome is disclosed by the frequent appearance of the formula "*sacer
esto*," "Let him be devoted to the infernal gods"; which was attached to
many criminal enactments by way of penalty. This not only rendered the
offender infamous, as implying the commission of an act of sacrilege,
but was virtually a proclamation of outlawry, and enabled anyone to kill
him with impunity.
