# -*- mode: org -*-

FIRST PREFACE. PAGE CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW CODE

SECOND PREFACE. CONCERNING THE CONFIRMATION OF THE CODE OF JUSTINIAN

THIRD PREFACE.  CONCERNING THE AMENDMENTS OF THE CODE OF OUR LORD
JUSTINIAN, AND THE SECOND EDITION OF THE SAME SECOND EDITION.




THE THREE PREFACES OF THE CODE OF JUSTINIAN
FIRST PREFACE. CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW CODE.


The Emperor Justinian to the Senate of the City of Constantinople. Those things
which seem to many former Emperors to require correction, but which none of
them ventured to carry into effect, We have decided to accomplish at the
present time with the assistance of Almighty God; and to diminish litigation by
the revision of the multitude of constitutions which are contained in the Three
Codes; namely, the Gregorian, the Hermogenian, and the Theodosian, as well as
in those other Codes promulgated after them by Theodosius of Divine Memory, and
by other Emperors, who succeeded him, in addition to those which We Ourselves
have promulgated, and to combine them in a single Code, under Our auspicious
name, in which compilation should be included not only the constitutions of the
three above-mentioned Codes, but also such new ones as subsequently have been
promulgated.
(1) Therefore, having in view the accomplishment of this extensive work, as
well as the maintenance of the public welfare, We have chosen, as being
competent for a task involving such labor and care, John, a most eminent man,
Ex-Quaestor of our Sacred Palace, and of consular, as well as patrician dignity;
Leontius, a man of the highest standing, an officer in the army, an Ex-
Praetorian Prefect, of consular and patrician dignity; Phocas, a most
illustrious man, an officer of the army, also of consular and patrician
dignity; Basilis, a most excellent man, Ex-Praetorian Prefect of the East, and
of patrician rank; Thomas, a most glorious man, Quaestor of our Sacred Palace,
and Ex-Consul; Tribonian, a distinguished man of great authority, and invested
with magisterial dignity; Constantine, an illustrious man, one of the Stewards
of Our bounty, Master of Requests, and of Our Judicial Inquiries; Theophilus, a
most eminent man, and one of the members of our Sacred Consistory, a Doctor of
Laws in this Fair City; and Dioscorous and Praesentinus, most learned jurists of
the Praetorian Tribunal.
(2) To these We have especially entrusted the suppression of superfluous
preambles, so far as this can be done without affecting the efficacy of the
laws, as well as of such enactments as are similar or contradictory, and, in
addition to this, the division of the laws; and it will be to the advantage to
omit such as have fallen into desuetude, to give expression in concise terms to
those which are included in the said three Codes, and in the New Constitutions,
and to place them under suitable titles, adding and omitting portions of the
same, and, indeed, changing their phraseology where convenience requires it.
bringing under one head enactments which are scattered through various
constitutions, and rendering their meaning clearer; so that the order of the
said constitutions may appear not only from the days and the consulate when
they were enacted, but also from their composition itself, by placing those
primarily published in the first place, and those which follow in the second.
And if any laws should be found in the three ancient codes without the date and
the name of the consul, or if any new constitutions have been inserted among
them, they should be so arranged that no doubt may arise with reference to
their general application, in such a way that rescripts addressed to certain
individuals, or originally issued by pragmatic sanction, may obtain the effect
of general constitutions, where, for the public welfare, they have been
included in a new code.
(3) Hence We have hastened to bring these matters to your notice, in order that
you may be informed to what an extent Our daily care is occupied with matters
having reference to the common welfare, by collecting such laws as are certain
and clear, and incorporating them into a single code, so that, by means of this
code, designated by Our auspicious name, the citation of the various
constitutions may cause decisions to be more readily rendered in all
litigation.
Given at Constantinople, on the Idesof February, during the reign and second
Consulship of the Emperor Justinian.
SECOND PREFACE.
CONCERNING THE CONFIRMATION OF THE CODE OF JUSTINIAN.
The maintenance of the integrity of the government depends upon two things,
namely, the force of arms and the observance of the laws: and, for this reason,
the fortunate race of the Romans obtained power and precedence over all other
nations in former times, and will do so forever, if God should be propitious;
since each of these has ever required the aid of the other, for, as military
affairs are rendered secure by the laws, so also are the laws preserved by
force of arms. Therefore, We have, with reason, directed Our attention, Our
aims, and Our labors, in the first place, to the maintenance of the public
welfare, and have corrected matters relating to the army in many ways, and thus
provided for everything; as We have by means of old laws not only brought
matters into a better condition, but We also have promulgated new laws, and by
Our just administration, or with additional expense, We have preserved those
already enacted, and afterwards by publishing new ones, have established them
most firmly for the obedience of Our subjects.
(1) But as it was necessary to reduce the vast number of the constitutions
contained in the three old codes, as well in the others compiled in former
times, and to clear up their obscurity by means of proper definitions, We have
applied Ourselves with willing mind to the accomplishment of this work for the
common good; and, after having
selected men conspicuous for their legal learning and ability, as well as for
their experience in business, and tireless zeal for the interests of the State,
We have committed this great task to them under certain limitations, and have
directed them to collect into a single code, to be designated by Our auspicious
name, the constitutions of the three ancient codes, namely the Gregorian,
Hermogenian, and Theodosian compilations, as well as all those subsequently
promulgated by Theodosius of Divine Memory, and the other princes who have
succeeded him; together with such constitutions as have been issued during Our
reign; and to see that any preambles which are not confirmed by subsequent
decrees, and any constitutions which are contradictory, or should be
suppressed, as well as such as have been repealed by others of later date, or
which are of the same character --- except those which, by conferring upon them
Our sanction to a certain extent, We have considered to be susceptible of
division, and by such division of these ancient laws some new principle may
appear to arise.
In addition to all this, many other matters relative to the composition of this
Code have been placed by Our authority in the hands of these most wise men; and
Almighty God has afforded this protection through Our zeal for the welfare of
the State.
(2) The following persons have been chosen for this work, and the completion of
a task of such importance, namely: that most excellent man, John, Ex-Quaestor of
Our Palace, and of consular and patrician dignity; as well as that most eminent
man, Leontius, Ex-Praetorian Prefect, of consular and patrician dignity; and
also the most distinguished Phocas, officer of the army, also of consular and
patrician dignity; and that most accomplished man of patrician dignity,
Basilis, Ex-Praetorian Prefect of the East, now Praetorian Prefect of Illyria;
also, the most illustrious Thomas, Quaestor of our Sacred Palace and Ex-Consul;
and the eminent Tribonian, of exalted magisterial dignity; the distinguished
Constantine, Steward of Our Imperial Largesses, Master of Requests, and of
Judicial Inquiries; Theophilus, former magistrate and Doctor of Laws in this
Fair City; as well as those most learned jurists, Dioscorus and Praesentinus,
members of your bar; and all that We have directed them to do, they with God's
assistance have, through assiduous and untiring industry, brought to a
successful conclusion, and offered to Us this new, systematically arranged
Justinian Code, compiled in such a manner as to contribute to the common
benefit, and meet the requirements of Our Empire.
(3) Therefore We have had in view the perpetual validity of this Code in your
tribunal, in order that all litigants, as well as the most accomplished
advocates, may know that it is lawful for them, under no circumstances, to cite
constitutions from the three ancient codes, of which mention has just been
made, or from those which at the present time are styled the New Constitutions,
in any judicial inquiry or contest; but that they are required to use only the
constitutions which are included in this Our Code, and that those who venture
to act otherwise will be liable to the crime of forgery; as the citation
of the said constitutions of Our Code, with the opinions of the ancient
interpreters of the law, will be sufficient for the disposal of all cases. No
doubt as to their validity should arise where any of them appears without a
date and without the name of the consul, or because they may have been
addressed to certain private individuals; as there can be no question whatever
that all have the force of general constitutions; and even if there should be
some of them from which anything has been taken, or to which anything has been
added, or which have been changed in certain respects (which We have specially
permitted the most excellent men aforesaid to do), We grant to no one the right
to cite the said constitutions, as they are stated in the books of the ancient
authorities, but merely to mention the opinions of the latter, as being of
legal effect when they are not opposed to the constitutions of this Our Code.
(4) Moreover, the pragmatic sanctions that are not included in Our Code, and
which have been granted to cities, corporate bodies, bureaus, offices, or
private individuals, shall remain in every respect valid, if they concede any
privilege as a special favor; but where they have been promulgated for the
settlement of some legal point We direct that they shall only hold when not
opposed to the provisions of Our Code. But in any matter which comes before
your tribunal, or in any other civil or military proceeding, or in one which
has reference to accounts forming part of the public expenses, or in such as
have any relation to the public welfare, We decree that they shall remain valid
as far as public convenience may require this to be done.
(5) Therefore let your illustrious and sublime authority, actuated by a desire
for the common good, and with zeal for the execution of Our orders, cause
information of this Code to be communicated to all peoples, by the promulgation
of an edict in the customary way, and by sending into each province, subject to
Our Empire, a copy bearing Our signature, so that in this manner the
constitutions of this Our Code may be brought to the knowledge of all persons;
and that during festival days, that is to say, from the sixteenth day of the
Kalendsof May of the seventh current indiction, and during the consulate of
that most illustrious man Decius, citations of the constitutions shall be made
from this Our Code.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate
of the illustrious Decius.





THIRD PREFACE.
CONCERNING THE AMENDMENTS OF THE CODE OP OUR LORD JUSTINIAN, AND THE SECOND
EDITION OF THE
SAME.



Our heart, Conscript Fathers, always induces Us to pay the strictest attention
to matters concerning the public welfare, so that nothing which has been begun
by Us may be left imperfect. Therefore, in the beginning of Our reign, we
formed the design of collecting in a single
body the Imperial Constitutions which were scattered through several volumes,
and the most of which were either repetitions or conflicting, and free them
from every defect. This work has now been perfected by certain most
distinguished and learned men, and has been subsequently confirmed by Us, as is
shown by Our two Constitutions prefixed hereto.
(1) But after We decreed that the ancient law should be observed, We rendered
fifty decisions, and promulgated several constitutions relative to the
advantages to be derived from the proposed work, by means of which the majority
of the former enactments were amended and abridged; and We divested all the
ancient law of superfluous prolixity, and then inserted the same in Our
Institutes and Digest.
(2) But, as Our new decisions and constitutions, which were promulgated after
the completion of Our Code, were distinct from the body of the same, and seemed
to demand our care and attention, and as some of them, which were afterwards
inserted, appeared to require alteration or correction, it seemed to Us
necessary to have the said constitutions revised by that eminent man Tribonian,
Ex-Quaestor and Ex-Consul, the authorized minister of our work; and also by the
illustrious Dorotheus, Quaestor and Doctor of Laws of Berytus; and, in addition
to these Menna, Constantine, and John, most eloquent men, and distinguished
advocates of the bar of this City, who were ordered to divide said
constitutions into separate chapters for the purpose of rendering them more
available; to place them under proper titles; and to add them to those
constitutions which had preceded them.
, (3) We permitted the aforesaid distinguished and most learned jurists to do
all these things, and when there was need of any correction, allowed them to
make it without hesitation, relying upon Our authority; and where any of the
constitutions were superfluous, or had been annulled by any of Our subsequent
decrees; or where they were found to be similar or conflicting, to remove and
separate them from the compilation of the Code itself; as well as to complete
such as were imperfect, and to bring to light those that were shrouded in
obscurity, so that not only the way of the Institutes and the Digest might
appear clear and open, but also that the splendor of the Constitutions of Our
Code might be manifest to all, and no constitution which resembled another, or
was contradictory or useless, should be retained, and no one should have any
doubt that what was confirmed by the revision was both valid and sufficiently
perspicuous. For, in the ancient Books, the authorities of former times not
only called the first, but also the second editions, revisions; which can be
readily ascertained from the works of that eminent jurist Ulpianus, on Sabinus,
by those who desire to know.
(4) These things having been accomplished according to Our intention, and the
Justinian Code having been purified and elucidated by the aforesaid most
illustrious and learned men (all of this having been done in compliance with
Our order, and the work offered to Us with its amplifications, and changes), We
ordered that it should be copied in accordance with the second edition, and not
in accordance
with the first, but as it was revised; and, by Our authority, We directed that
it alone should be used in all tribunals, whenever the Divine Constitutions
were applicable, from the fourth day of the Kalendsof January of the most
auspicious Consulate of Ourself and that illustrious man Paulinus; and that no
constitution not contained in this Our Code should be cited, unless in the
course of events some new question may arise which requires Our decision. For,
if something better should be found hereafter, and it becomes necessary to
revise a constitution, no one will doubt that We should do so, and incorporate
into another compilation those laws which are designated by the name New
Constitutions.
(5) Therefore, having repeated Our order that We shall permit none hereafter to
quote anything from Our decisions, or from other constitutions, which We have
previously promulgated, or from the first edition of the Justinian Code; but
that only what may be found written in this Our present purified and amended
Code shall be regarded as authority, and cited in all tribunals, We have
ordered it to be transcribed without any ambiguity, as was done in the case of
Our Institutes and Digest, so that everything which has been compiled by Us
shall be clear and intelligible, not only in the chirography, but also in the
laws themselves, although on this account the matter contained in this Code has
been considerably extended.
(6) Therefore, Most Reverend and Illustrious Fathers, in order that Our labors
may become manifest to you and obtain authority through all time, We have
presented this collection of laws to your most distinguished Order.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventeenth day of the Kalendsof December,
during the Consulate of Our Lord Justinian, for the fourth time Consul, and of
Paulus.
