# -*- mode: org -*-

BOOK XV.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE ACTION ON THE PECULIUM........................
235

TITLE II. PAGE WHEN THE ACTION ON THE PECULIUM IS LIMITED TO A
YEAR......... 258

TITLE III.

CONCERNING THE ACTION BASED ON THE ADVANTAGE DERIVED BY A FATHER OR A
MASTER WITH REFERENCE TO HIS PROPERTY........ 260

TITLE IV.

CONCERNING THE ACTION BASED ON THE AUTHORIZATION OF THE FATHER OR THE
MASTER.............................................. 270





THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XV.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE ACTION ON THE PECULIUM.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The Prætor judged it to be the proper way to first explain the contracts
of those who are subjected to the authority of another which give a
right of action for the entire amount, and then to come to the present
one, where an action is granted on the *peculium.*

\(1) This Edict, moreover, is threefold, for from it arises an action on
the *peculium*, one for property employed in the affairs of another, and
one based upon the order of another.

\(2) The words of the Edict are as follows: "Whatever business is
transacted with him who is under the control of another."

\(3) Mention is made of him and not of her, still, however, an action is
granted by this Edict on account of one belonging to the female sex.

\(4) Where a contract is made with a son under paternal control or a
slave who has not yet reached puberty, the action on the *peculium* is
granted either against the master or the father, if the *peculium* of
either of them has been increased in value.

\(5) The word "control" is understood to be applicable both to the son
and to the slave.

\(6) The ownership of slaves should not be given greater consideration
than the right of having authority over them; for we may be sued not
only on account of our own slaves but also on account of those who are
held in common, as well as of those who serve us in good faith as
slaves, whether they are freemen, or the slaves of others.

\2. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.*

The action arising out of the *peculium* and the other prætorian actions
are only granted against the person entitled to the usufruct or use,
where the slave subject to usufruct or use would generally acquire, and
in other cases against the owner of the property.

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Although the Prætor promises this action where business was done with a
party who is under the control of someone, still, it must be remembered
that the action on the *peculium* is granted even if he is under the
control of no one; for instance, where a contract is made with a slave
belonging to an estate before the estate is entered upon.

\(1) Wherefore Labeo says that if a slave is substituted in the second
or third degree, and a contract is made with him while the heirs of the
first degree are deliberating, and, afterwards, when they reject the
estate, he himself becomes free and an heir, it may be said that an

action can be brought against him on the *peculium*, as well as on the
ground of property employed in the affairs of another.

\(2) It is of little importance whether a slave belongs to a man or a
woman, for a woman can also be sued in an action on the *peculium.*

\(3) Pedius states that even owners under puberty can be sued in the
action on the *peculium*, for the contract is not made with the minors
themselves, and the authority of the guardian must be considered. He
also says that a ward cannot give his *peculium* to a slave without the
authority of his guardian.

\(4) We say also that the action on the *peculium* should be granted
against the curator of an insane person; for even the slave of the
latter may have a *peculium*, not where it has been conceded that he
should have it, but where he was not prohibited from having it.

\(5) It has been discussed, whether if a son under paternal control or a
slave becomes surety for anyone, or incurs liability in any other way,
or gives a mandate, an action on the *peculium* will lie? The better
opinion is that in the case of a slave the cause for giving the security
or the mandate should be considered; and Celsus in the Sixth Book
approves of this opinion in the case of a slave who is a surety.
Therefore, where a slave intervenes as surety, and not as managing
property belonging to the *peculium*, his master will not be bound on
account of the *peculium.*

\(6) Julianus also stated in the Twelfth Book of the Digest that where a
slave directs that a payment be made to my creditor, it should be
ascertained what reason he had for giving this mandate. If he directed
him to make payment to the party as to his own creditor, the master will
be liable on the *peculium*, but if he only performed the duty of a
voluntary surety, the master will not be liable on the *peculium.*

\(7) What the same Julianus stated agrees with the following, namely; if
I accept a surety from my son, whatever I receive from the said surety I
shall be compelled to make good, not on the ground of property employed
for my benefit, but in an action on mandate to the amount of the
*peculium.*

You may understand that the same rule applies in the case of the surety
of a slave, and where another person pays me in behalf of my son who is
my debtor. He also stated that if my son was not my debtor, the surety
will be entitled to make use of an exception on the ground of fraud, and
to bring a personal action for recovery if he has made payment.

\(8) Where a slave who is assuming to be a freeman, consents to
arbitration, the question arises whether an action on the *peculium
*should be granted for the penalty for non-compliance with the award,
this being, as it were an instance of voluntary agency, just as it is
granted in the case of a maritime loan? The better opinion seems to both
Nerva, the son, and myself to be that an action on the *peculium*
arising from a reference to arbitration by a slave should not be
granted, since an action is not granted against him if the slave is
condemned in court.

\(9) Where a son is accepted as a surety, or is voluntarily bound in any
way, the question arises whether he makes his father liable on the
*peculium? *The correct opinion is that of Sabinus and Cassius, who
think that the father is always liable on the *peculium*, and that the
son differs in this respect from the slave.

\(10) Wherefore, the father will always be liable where a reference to
arbitration is made. Papinianus also makes *a* similar statement in the
Ninth Book of Questions; and he says that it makes no difference what
point was referred to arbitration, whether it was one on which a party
could have brought an action on the *peculium* against the father, or
one on which he could not have done this, as suit is brought against the
father on the stipulation.

\(11) He also says that the father is liable to an action on a judgment
to the amount of the *peculium*, and this view Marcellus likewise holds,
even in a case on account of which a father would not be liable to a
suit on the *peculium;* for just as in a stipulation a contract is made
with the son, so also a contract is made in a case in court; hence the
origin of the proceeding should not be considered as the source of the
obligation, but the liability under the judgment. Wherefore, he is of
the same opinion where the son, acting as a defender of another, has a
decision rendered against him.

\(12) It is established that a personal action for recovery on the
ground of theft can be brought against a son under paternal control. The
question arises, however, whether the action on the *peculium* should be
granted against the father or the master, and the better opinion is that
the action on the *peculium* should be granted for the amount by which
the master has been pecuniarily benefited by the theft which was
committed. Labeo approves of this opinion, for the reason that it is
most unjust that by the theft of the slave, the master should profit
without being accountable. For the action on the *peculium* will also
lie in a case where property has been carried away, and an action is
brought on account of a son under paternal control to the amount which
has come into the hands of the father.

\(13) If a son under paternal control who is a *duumvir*, did not take
care that security be given to insure the safety of the property of a
ward, Papinianus says in the Ninth Book of Questions that the action *De
peculio* will lie. I do not think that the question whether the son was
made a decurion with the consent of his father changes anything, for the
father was obliged to provide for the public welfare.

\4. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VII.*

The *peculium* is not what the slave keeps an account of separately from
his master, but is what the master himself has set aside, keeping a
distinct account from that of the slave; for since the master can take
away the entire amount of *peculium* from the slave, or increase or
diminish it, the question to be considered is not what the slave, but
what the master has done for the purpose of creating a *peculium* for
the slave.

\(1) I think this to be true, however, where a master wishes to release
the slave from a debt, so that if the master has remitted what the slave
owed by his mere will, the slave ceases to be his debtor, but if the
master keeps his accounts in such a way that he makes himself appear
indebted to the slave, when in fact he is not his debtor, I think that
the contrary opinion is correct, for a *peculium* should be increased
not by words but by business matters.

\(2) From these rules it is apparent that not what a slave has without
the knowledge of his master belongs to the *peculium*, but whatever he
has with his consent, otherwise what a slave steals from his master will
become a part of the *peculium*, which is not true.

\(3) It often happens, however, that the *peculium* of a slave suffers
diminution without the knowledge of his master; for example, where a
slave damages his property, or commits theft.

\(4) If you commit theft against me with the aid of my slave, this must
be deducted from the *peculium* to the amount by which it is less than
what I can recover on account of the stolen property.

\(5) If the *peculium* of the slave is exhausted by the debts due to the
master, the property nevertheless remains in the condition of *peculium;
*for if the master should give a debt to the slave, or some other party
should pay the master in the name of the slave, the *peculium* will be
filled up, and there will be no need of a new grant by the master.

\(6) Not only is that to be included in the *peculium* of any slaves of
which they keep an account separate from the master, but also that which
they have separate from the property of a slave to whose *peculium* they
belong.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The father or master can be sued on account of a deposit only to the
extent of the *peculium*, and where advantage has been taken of me
through any wrongful conduct of theirs.

\(1) Moreover, the father or master is liable only to the amount of the
*peculium*, where any property has been delivered to a son under
paternal control, or to a slave to be held on sufferance.

\(2) Where a son under paternal control has tendered an oath, and it has
been taken, an action on the *peculium* should be granted, as if a
contract had been entered into; but it is different in the case of a
slave.

\(3) The *peculium* is so called on account of its being a trifling sum
of money or a small amount of property.

\(4) Tubero, however, defines *peculium* to be (as Celsus states in the
Sixth Book of the Digest) what the slave has separate and apart from his
master's accounts with the permission of the latter, after deducting
therefrom anything which may be due to his master.

\6. *Celsus, Digest, Book VI.*

Labeo says that the definition of *peculium* which Tubero gave does not
include the *peculium* of sub-slaves, but this is not correct, for, by

the very act that a master has granted *peculium* to his slave it must
be understood that he has also granted it to the sub-slave.

\7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Celsus himself approves of this opinion of Tubero.

\(1) And he adds that a ward of an insane person cannot grant a
*peculium* to his slave, but the *peculium* which has been previously
granted (that is before the insanity occurred, or where it was created
by the father of the ward), will not be taken away by these conditions.
This opinion is correct, and agrees with what Marcellus added in a note
on Julianus, namely: that it can happen that where a slave has two
masters he may have a *peculium *with reference to one, but not with
reference to the other; for instance, where one of the masters is insane
or a ward, if, as he says, some hold that a slave cannot have a
*peculium* unless it is granted by his master. I think, however, that in
order for the slave to have a *peculium*, it is not necessary that it
should be granted by his master, but that it cannot be taken away. The
free administration of the *peculium* is a different matter, for this
must be

explicitly granted.

\(2) It is evident, however, that it is not necessary for him to know
all the details of the *peculium*, but to be generally informed as to
them; and Pomponius inclines to this opinion.

\(3) Pedius states in the Fifteenth Book that a minor, as well as a son
and a slave, can have a *peculium*, since he says that in this instance,
everything depends upon the grant of the master, and therefore if the
slave or the son should become insane, he will retain the *peculium.*

\(4) Property of all kinds, both chattels and land, may be included in
the *peculium;* the party may also have in his *peculium* sub-slaves as
well as the *peculium* of the latter, and, in addition to this, even
claims due from their debtors.

\(5) Moreover, if anything is owing to the slave in an action of theft
or in any other action, it is counted as part of the *peculium*, and as
Labeo says, an estate and a legacy likewise.

\(6) Again, he will have in his *peculium* whatever his master owes him,
for suppose he has expended money in the business of his master, and the
latter is willing to remain his debtor, or his master has brought suit
against one of his debtors. Wherefore, for example, if the owner has
recovered double damages for eviction on account of a purchase by the
slave, the amount must be turned into his *peculium*, unless the master
should happen to have had the intention that this should not form part
of the *peculium* of the slave.

\(7) In like manner, if a fellow-slave owes him anything, it will belong
to the *peculium*, provided he has a *peculium*, or shall acquire one
afterwards.

\8. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.*

Any of his own property which the master desires to belong to the
*peculium*, he does not at once render such, but only after he has
delivered the same, or, if it was in the possession of the slave, has
treated

it as delivered; for property requires actual delivery. On the other
hand, however, whenever he manifests unwillingness, the possessions of
the slave cease to be *peculium.*

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

But if the master causes any damage to his slave, this will not be
credited to the *peculium*, any more than if he stole it.

\(1) It is clear that if a fellow-slave has committed any damage to
property, or stolen it from the other, this will be considered to form
part of the *peculium*, and Pomponius holds the same opinion in the
Eleventh Book, for if the master either has recovered or can recover
anything from a party who has stolen property from the *peculium*, this,
Neratius says, in the Second Book of Opinions, must be credited to him.

\(2) The *peculium*, however, is to be computed after what is due to the
master has been deducted, for the master is presumed to have been more
diligent, and to have proceeded against his slave.

\(3) To this explanation Servius adds: "Where anything is due to those
who are under his control," for no one doubts that this also is owing to
the master.

\(4) Moreover, that also will be deducted which is due to those persons
who are under the guardianship or care of the master or father, or whose
business he is attending to, provided he is free from fraud; since if he
destroys or diminishes the *peculium* by fraudulent acts, he will be
liable; for if the master is always presumed to be more diligent and to
bring suit, why may he not be said also to have proceeded against
himself in this instance, in which he would be liable either on the
ground of guardianship, or of business transacted, or in an equitable
action? For, as Pedius very properly says, the amount of the *peculium*
is diminished by what is owing to the master or father, because it is
not probable that the master would consent to the slave having in his
*peculium* what is owing to him. And, indeed, since, in other instances,
we say that one who is attending to business for another or who is
administering a guardianship, has recovered money from himself, why
should he not in this case of *peculium* also have recovered what he
ought to have done? Therefore this opinion may be defended, just as if
he had paid the amount to himself, where anyone attempts to bring an
action on the *peculium.*

\(5) The creditor of the slave who has become the heir of his master,
also deducts from the *peculium* whatever is owing to him, if he is
sued, whether the slave has received his freedom or not. The same rule
applies if the slave is bequeathed absolutely; for he can deduct what is
due to him in this way, as if he had appeared and proceeded against
himself, although he had, at no time, the ownership of the slave who was
manumitted or bequeathed unconditionally; and this Julianus states in
the Twelfth Book of the Digest. Julianus says in the same place, more
positively, that it is certain if the slave has received his freedom on
some condition, the heir can make the deduction, for he has become the
master. To confirm his opinion, Julianus also states that if I become
the heir of a party who, after the death of the slave or the

son, could have been sued within a year on the *peculium*, there is no
doubt that I can deduct what is owing to me.

\(6) The master will make the deduction, whether the slave owes anything
to him on a contract, or on accounts which remain unpaid. And also if he
owes him because of some offence, as, for instance, on account of a
theft which he has committed, the deduction will be made.

It is a question, however, whether the amount of the theft itself, that
is, only the loss which the master has sustained, shall be deducted, or
in fact only so much as could be demanded if the slave of another had
committed the offence; that is to say, with the penalties for theft. The
former opinion is the more correct one, namely, that only the amount of
the theft itself can be deducted.

\(7) Where a slave has wounded himself, the master should not deduct
this damage, any more than if he had killed himself or thrown himself
over a precipice; for even slaves have a natural right to inflict
injuries upon their bodies. But if the master has cared for the slave
who has been wounded by himself, I think that he is indebted to his
master for the expenses incurred; although if he had cared for him when
he was ill, he would rather have been seeing after his own property.

\(8) Again, if a master has bound himself on account of a slave, or,
having done so has made payment, this will be deducted from the
*peculium; *so, likewise, if money has been lent to him by the direction
of his master; for Julianus states in the Twelfth Book of the Digest
that this should be deducted. I think that this is true only where what
was received did not come into the hands of the master or father,
otherwise, he ought to charge this against himself. If, however, he
becomes security for his slave, Julianus states in the Twelfth Book of
the Digest, that this should be deducted; Marcellus, however, says that,
in both instances, if the master has not yet lost anything, it is better
that the money should be paid to the creditor, provided he gives
security to refund it, if the master is sued on this account and pays
anything; than that the deduction should be made in the first place, so
that the creditor, in the meantime may profit by the interest on the
money.

Where, however, the master, having been sued, has judgment rendered
against him, a deduction should be made in a subsequent action on the
*peculium*, as the master or father has become liable on the judgment;
for, if not having had judgment rendered against him, he should have
paid the creditor anything on account of the slave, he could deduct this
also.

\10. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

If, however, the first action on the *peculium* is still in suspense,
and judgment is rendered in the subsequent action, no account of the
first action should be taken in any way in the decision of the second;
because the position of the first creditor in an action on the
*peculium* is the better one, for, not he who first joined issue, but he
who first obtained a decision of the court, is held to be entitled to
the preference.

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where a master who has been sued in a noxal action has paid the damages
assessed, this ought to be deducted from the *peculium;* but where he
surrendered the slave by way of reparation, nothing should be deducted.

\(1) Moreover, if the master bound himself to pay something on account
of the slave, this should be deducted; just as if the slave had promised
to assume the obligation of a debtor to his master. The same rule
applies if he has assumed an obligation to his master in consideration
of his freedom, he, having become, to a certain extent, a debtor of his
master, but only where suit is brought against him after he has been
manumitted.

\(2) Where, however, a slave has exacted payment from a debtor of his
master, the question arises whether he has made himself a debtor to his
master? Julianus, in the Twelfth Book of the Digest, says that the
master will not be entitled to make a deduction, unless he ratified the
collection of the money, and the same must also be said in the case of a
son under paternal control. I think that the opinion of Julianus is
correct, for we take into account natural debts in deductions from the
*'peculium;* for natural equity requires that a son or a slave should be
released from liability because he seems to have exacted what was not
due.

\(3) It is a question, however, whether, what the master has once
deducted, when he has been sued, he should again remove from the
*peculium, *if suit is brought against him; or whether, where deduction
has once been made, it should be held that he has been satisfied.
Neratius and Nerva think, and Julianus also states in the Twelfth Book
of the Digest, that if he really removed it from the *peculium* it
should not be deducted, but if, in fact, he left the *peculium* in the
same condition he should make a deduction.

\(4) He further says that, if a slave has in his *peculium* a sub-slave
worth five *aurei*, and he owes the master five, on account of which the
master deducted the sub-slave, and the latter having afterwards died,
the slave purchased another of the same value; he does not cease to be a
debtor to the master, just as if the sub-slave had been a loss to the
latter, unless he happened to die after he had taken him away from the
slave and had paid himself.

\(5) The same author very properly says that, if when the sub-slave was
worth ten *aurei*, the master having been sued on the *peculium* paid
five on account of the slave, because five were due to himself, and that
afterwards the sub-slave died; the master can deduct ten *aurei* against
another plaintiff on the *peculium*, because he had made the slave his
debtor with reference also to the five *aurei* which he had paid on his
account. This opinion is correct, unless he took the sub-slave away for
the purpose of paying himself.

\(6) What we have said, however, that is, that what is due to him who is
sued on the *peculium* should be deducted, must be understood to mean if
he could not recover this in any other way.

\(7) Julianus then says that if a vendor who has sold a slave together
with his *peculium*, is sued on the *peculium*, he should not deduct
what is due to him, for he could have deducted this from the account of
the *peculium;* and he can now bring a personal action to recover it as
not having been due, since what is owing to the master is not to be
included in the *peculium.*

He can also, so he says, bring an action on sale. This is to be approved
where there was so much in the *peculium* when it was sold that the
master could satisfy his debt, but if afterwards there was an addition
made to his claim, and the condition of the debt having been fulfilled,
which debt the master has not satisfied, the contrary opinion

must be held.

\(8) He also asks, if anyone has obtained a slave on account of whom he
had an action on the *peculium*, can he deduct what is owing to him
since he is entitled to an action *De peculio* against the vendor? He
says very properly that he can, for any other person, likewise, can
choose whether he will bring suit against the vendor or the purchaser,
and this party therefore selects deduction instead of suit. I do not see
what the creditors have to complain of, since they themselves can sue
the vendor if they think that perhaps there may be something in the

*peculium.*

\(9) But, not only what is owing to the party who is sued should be
deducted, but also what may be owing to his partner, and Julianus holds
this opinion in the Twelfth Book of the Digest; for, accordance with the
same principle on which either may be sued for the entire amount, he has
a right to deduct what is due to the other. This opinion is accepted:

\12. *Julianus, Digest, Book XII.*

For the reason that in this instance proceedings can be instituted
against the one with reference to whom there is no *peculium.*

\13. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

But that neither party can deduct what is due to the other is not true
in the case of purchaser and vendor, of usufructuary and the mere owner,
and in that of others who are not partners, as well as the sole
proprietor and the *bona-fide* purchaser; and this Julianus states in
the Twelfth Book.

\14. *Julianus, Digest, Book XII.*

Moreover, where it is directed by a will that a slave shall immediately
become free, suit on the *peculium* should be brought against all the
heirs, and none of them can deduct more than is due to himself.

\(1) Again, where the slave died during the lifetime of his master, and
the master then died within the year, leaving several heirs, both the
action on the *peculium* and the right of deduction are divided.

\15. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

But if there are two *bona fide* possessors, it must still be said that
neither can deduct more than is due to him; and the same rule applies

where there are two usufructuaries, because they have no partnership
between them. The same rule sometimes also applies to the case of
partners, if they should happen to have separate *peculia* among
themselves, so that one of them cannot be sued on account of the
*peculium* of the other. Where, however, the *peculium* is in common,
they may be sued for the entire amount, and what is owing to each one of
them shall be deducted.

\16. *Julianus, Digest, Book XII.*

What then would be the case where the *peculium* of a common slave
belongs to one of his masters alone? In the first place, if any one
sells a half share in a slave, and grants him no *peculium*, and then,
if any one gives money or property of any description to a slave owned
in common, in such a way as to retain the ownership of said property,
but to grant the slave the management of the same; Marcellus says in a
note that this is an instance where one owner has taken away the
*peculium*, or where an owner has actually granted one, but the grant is
applicable to the obligations of his debtors.

\17. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

If my ordinary slave has sub-slaves, can I deduct from the *peculium *of
my ordinary slave what the sub-slaves owe me? And the first question is,
whether their *peculia* are included in that of the ordinary slave.
Proculus and Atilicinus think that as the sub-slaves belong to the
*peculium *together with their own *peculia*, and indeed, what their
owner (that is to say the ordinary slave) owes me can be deducted from
their *peculium, *but that, however, which the sub-slaves themselves
owe, can only be deducted from their own *peculium.*

Moreover, if they are indebted, not to me but to the ordinary slave, the
amount due will be deducted from their *peculium* as owing to a
fellow-slave. That, however, which the ordinary slave owes to them will
not be deducted from the *peculium* of the former, because their
*peculium *is included in his. Servius was of this opinion, but I hold
that their *peculium* will be increased, just as if a master is indebted
to his slave.

\18. *Paulus, Questions, Book IV.*

The result of this is that if his own *peculium* is left to Stichus, and
he brings suit under the will, he will not be compelled to surrender
what his sub-slave owes to the testator, unless the sub-slave has a
*peculium.*

\19. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Hence the question arises whether, if an action is brought on a
*peculium* on account of the ordinary slave, proceedings can also be
instituted with reference to the sub-slave, and I think this cannot be
done. But where an action has been brought on the *peculium* of a
sub-slave, one can also be brought on the *peculium* of the ordinary
slave.

\(1) There may be in my hands a *peculium* held by two different legal
titles; as, for instance, if there is a dotal slave, he may have a

*peculium* in which I am interested, and he may also have one in which
my wife is interested, for what he has obtained through the business of
the husband, or by his labor, belongs to the husband; and hence, if he
has been appointed an heir, or a legacy has been bequeathed to him with
reference to the husband, Pomponius says that he is not obliged to give
it up. Therefore, if an action is brought against me on a contract in
which I am interested, can I deduct everything that is owing to me,
whether connected with my own business or with that of my wife? Or do we
separate the cases of the husband and wife so far as the two *peculia*
are concerned, to enable the origin of the debt for which suit is
brought to be considered; so that if, in fact, proceedings are
instituted with reference to the *peculium* in which the wife is
concerned, I can deduct what is due from that contract, if on a contract
in which I am interested I can deduct what belongs to me?

This question is more clearly treated in the case of an usufructuary,
whether suit on the *peculium* can be brought against him only on the
contract which concerns him, or whether it can be brought on any
contract? Marcellus states that the usufructuary is also liable, and on
any contract, for he who makes the contract considers the entire
*peculium* of the slave to be his own property. He says that it is
evident that it must be admitted, in any event, that when the party who
is interested in the matter has been first sued, he who has not obtained
anything may be sued for the remainder. This opinion is the more
reasonable one, and is approved by Papinianus. It must also be held in
the case of two *bona-fide* purchasers. But in the case of the husband,
it is better to say simply that he is liable to the action on the
*peculium.* If, however, the husband had paid something on account of a
slave of this kind, can he deduct it as against the wife bringing an
action on account of her dowry? And he says that if what was paid to the
creditor relates to the *peculium* of each kind, it should be deducted
*pro rata* from the *peculium* of both, and from this it may be
understood that if the contract had reference to either *peculium*,
there will be, on the one hand, a deduction made for the wife alone, and
on the other, none will be made, if the contract had reference to that
*peculium* which remained with the husband.

\(2) Sometimes an action on the *peculium* is granted to the
usufructuary himself against the master; as, for instance, if the slave
has a *peculium* with reference to the former but with reference to the
latter he has none, or less than what is due to the usufructuary.
Conversely speaking, the same thing takes place, although in the case of
two owners an action on partnership or one for the partition of common
property will be sufficient;

\20. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

For partners cannot bring the action on *peculium* against one another.
. 21. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The Prætor has also, for the best of reasons, charged to the *peculium*
whatever the master had done with malicious intent through

which the *peculium* is diminished. We must, however, understand
malicious intent to signify where he has deprived him of the *peculium,
*and also where he has permitted him to involve the affairs of the
*peculium* to the prejudice of creditors; and Mela writes that this is
an act performed with malicious intent.

Moreover, if when anyone entertains the idea that some other party is
going to bring an action against him, and transfer the *peculium* to
someone else, he is not free from fraud. If, however, he pays the debt
to a third party, I have no doubt that he is not liable, as he pays a
creditor, and it is lawful for a creditor to be diligent in recovering
what belongs to him.

\(1) If the act is committed through the fraud of a guardian, the
curator of an insane person, or an agent, it should be considered
whether the ward, or the insane person, or the principal should be sued
on the *peculium?* I think that if the guardian is solvent, the ward
should make good what has been lost through his fraud, and especially is
this the case if anything has come into his hands; and so Pomponius
states in the Eighth Book of the Epistles. The same must be said in the
case of a curator or an agent.

\(2) A purchaser will not be liable for the fraud of the vendor, nor
will the heir or other successor, except to the extent that property has
come into his hands by reason of it.

\(3) Whether the fraud has been committed before or after issue has been
joined, it comes within the jurisdiction of the court.

\(4) If the master or father refuses to answer in the action on
*peculium*, he should not be heard, but he must be compelled to join
issue as in the case of any other personal action.

\22. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VII.*

If the master has given security against threatened injury with
reference to a house which is part of the *peculium*, this should be
taken into account, and therefore security should be furnished by the
party who is bringing suit on the *peculium.*

\23. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book IX.*

The party giving security against threatened injury with reference to a
house belonging to the *peculium*, must furnish it for the entire
amount, just as a noxal action on account of a sub-slave must be
defended for the full amount, because the plaintiff, if the defence is
not properly made, removes the property, or holds it in possession as a
pledge.

\24. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXVI.*

The curator of an insane person can both give and refuse the management
of the *peculium* to the slave, as well as to the son of the said insane
person.

\25. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXIII.*

Any clothing is included in the *peculium* which the master has given
for the slave to make use of permanently, and has delivered it to him

with the understanding that no one else shall use it, and that it will
be kept by him in compliance with these conditions. Clothing, however,
which the master had given to the slave for temporary use and only to be
employed for certain purposes at certain times, for example, when he is
in attendance upon him, or waits upon him at the table, does not become
part of the *peculium. *26. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

If the master has once, in a case of this kind, that is to say, where he
has been guilty of fraud, made good the amount of the *peculium* after
he has been sued; he will not be compelled to pay anything to others on
the same ground. And, moreover, if the slave owes him as much as that by
which he has fraudulently diminished the amount, judgment should not be
rendered against him. It follows from what has been said that also where
the slave has been manumitted or alienated, he will be liable also on
the ground of fraud, within the year.

\27. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

The action on the *peculium* is granted on account of both female
slaves, and daughters under paternal control, and especially where the
woman is a tailoress or a weaver, or conducts any ordinary trade, this
action can be brought against her. Julianus says that the action on
deposit, and also that on loan for use, should be granted with reference
to them, and that the contributory action should be granted if they have
transacted business with merchandise belonging to the *peculium* to the
knowledge of the father or the master. This is still more certain where
property has been employed for the benefit of the father or master, and
the contract was made under his direction.

\(1) It is established that the heir of the master should also deduct
such property belonging to the estate as the slave, on whose account
suit on the *peculium* is brought against him, had either removed,
consumed, or damaged before the estate was entered upon.

\(2) Where a slave has been alienated, although the Prætor promises an
action on the *peculium* within a year, against the party who alienated
him, still, an action is granted against the new master; and it makes no
difference whether he has acquired another *peculium* with him, or
whether he has granted to the same slave what he bought or received as a
gift along with him at the time.

\(3) It has also been decided (and Julianus approves of it) that
creditors are, in any event, to be allowed to bring suit either for
shares against individuals, or against any one party for the entire
amount.

\(4) Julianus, however, does not think that the party who sold the slave
should be permitted to bring an action on the *peculium* against the
purchaser with reference to what he lent to the slave before the

sale.

\(5) Moreover, if I make a loan to the slave of another, and buy him,
and then sell him, he also does not think that an action should be
granted me against the purchaser.

\(6) He holds, however, that an action should be granted to me against
the vendor, but only within a year to be computed from the day of the
purchase, for the amount which I loaned him while he still belonged to
another, that being deducted from what the slave has, as *peculium*,
with reference to me.

\(7) But as Julianus does not think that when he has been alienated, an
action should be granted to me against the purchaser, with reference to
what I myself have lent to my own slave; so also he denies that I should
be allowed to institute proceedings against the purchaser on account of
what my own slave has lent to another of my own slaves, if he to whom
the loan was made has been alienated.

\(8) Where anyone has contracted with a slave belonging to two or more
persons, he should be allowed to bring suit for the entire amount
against anyone of the owners he wishes; for it is unjust that he who
contracted with one should be obliged to divide up his action against
several adversaries, and an account should be taken not only of the
*peculium* which the said slave has with reference to the party against
whom proceedings are instituted, but also of that in which the other
owner or owners are interested. No loss, however, will result from this
to the party against whom judgment was rendered, as he can himself
recover from his partner or partners by the action of partnership, or by
that for the division of common property, whatever he has paid over and
above his share.

Julianus says that this will apply where the other owner was entitled to
any *peculium*, for, in this instance, each one, by paying, will be held
to have released his partner from debt; but where there is no *peculium
*in which the other is interested, the contrary rule applies, because he
is not understood to release him from debt in any way.

\28. *Julianus, Digest, Book XL*

Wherefore, if no one has become the heir or possessor of the estate of
the partner, he against whom the action was brought should have judgment
rendered against him for the amount of whatever *peculium* he may be
entitled to in addition to as much as he can obtain out of the estate.

\29. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

Where anyone has, by will, ordered that a slave shall be free, and has
left as heirs persons who have contracted with said slave, the coheirs
may proceed against one another by the action *De peculio*, for each one
is liable to anyone else who brings suit for the amount of the
*peculium* to which he is entitled.

\(1) Even though a master prohibits a contract to be made with a slave,
an action on the *peculium* will lie against him.

\30. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The question arises whether the action on the *peculium* may be brought,
even if there is nothing in the *peculium* when proceedings are
instituted, provided only there is something in it at the time that
judg-

ment was rendered? Proculus and Pegasus say that it will, nevertheless,
lie, for the claim is properly set forth, even though there may be
nothing in the *peculium.* It has been established that the same rule
applies with reference to an action for production, and an action *in
rem.* This opinion is also approved by us.

\(1) Where the action is brought against one who is heir to a share of
the estate of his master or father, judgment must be rendered against
him only to the amount of the *peculium* to which the heir who is sued
is entitled. The same rule applies where property has been employed for
his benefit, proportionately, unless he has used something for the
benefit of the heir himself, nor can the heir be sued like one of the
joint-owners, but only for his share.

\(2) But if the slave himself is appointed heir to a share, the action
may also be brought against him, in like manner.

\(3) Where, however, the son is appointed, although only for a share, he
will, nevertheless, be liable to an action for the entire amount, but if
he wishes to obtain the proportionate obligation of his co-heir, he
should be heard; for what if the property has been employed for the
benefit of the father? Why should not the son recover from his co-heir
what is included in the estate of his father? The rule is the same where
the *peculium*, is very valuable.

\(4) He who has once brought an action on the *peculium*, can again
bring suit for the remainder of the debt if the *peculium* has been
increased.

\(5) Where a creditor has been beaten by a vendor by means of an
exception grounded on the lapse of a year, relief should be granted him
against the purchaser; but if this has been effected by any other
exception, he should only be relieved to the extent that, where the
amount which he could have obtained from the vendor has been deducted,
he may recover the remainder from the purchaser.

\(6) Where fraud is alleged, account must be taken of the time, for the
Prætor might not permit fraud to be pleaded in bar after the term for
bringing an action on fraud has elapsed, since this action is not
granted after the expiration of the time established by law.

\(7) In the case of the heir, however, the clause relating to fraud
ought to be drawn up with reference to what has come into his hands, and
not for more than this.

\31. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where, however, the heir himself has committed fraud he must make good
the entire amount.

\32. *Ulpianus, Disputations, Book II.*

Where one of two or more heirs of a party who could have been sued
within a year, has an action brought against him, and the slave has been
manumitted, or this has been directed to be done, or he has been sold or
died, all the heirs will be released from liability; even though the
party who is sued may not have judgment rendered against him for a
larger amount than that of the *peculium* which he has in his

hands, and this Julianus also stated. The same rule applies where the
property was employed for the benefit of any of the heirs. Where,
however, there are several usufructuaries or *bona-fide* possessors, and
one is sued, he releases the others, although he should not have
judgment rendered against him for a greater amount of the *peculium*
than that which he has in his possession. But although this takes place
in accordance with the strict rule of law, still, equity demands that an
action should be granted against those who are released by an accident
of the law, so that recovery rather than the bringing of the suit should
discharge them; for he who makes the contract with the slave has in his
mind, as his property, the entire amount of his *peculium*, wherever it
may be.

\(1) But although in this action the former one is restored, still, an
account should be taken of both the increase and the decrease; and,
therefore, whether at present there is nothing in the *peculium* or
something has accrued to it, the present state of the *peculium* must be
considered. Hence, so far as both the vendor and the purchaser are
concerned, this seems to us to be the better opinion, namely: that we
can recover from the purchaser what has accrued to the *peculium* and
the claim of the purchaser is not to be regarded as retroactive, to the
time when the vendor was sued, and as included in the same legal
proceeding.

\(2) If the vendor of the slave sells him along with the *peculium, *and
delivers the *peculium*, suit cannot be brought against him on the same,
even within a year; for, as Neratius has stated, this price of the slave
is not *peculium.*

\33. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XII.*

But where anyone has sold a slave with the understanding that he was to
receive a price for the *peculium*, the *peculium* is held to be in the
hands of the party to whom the price of the same was paid.

\34. *Pomponius, Various Passages, Book XII.*

And not in the hands of him who holds the property constituting the
*peculium.*

\35. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XII.*

But where the heir was directed to deliver the *peculium* on receipt of
a certain sum, the *peculium* is not held to be in the hands of the
heir.

\36. *Ulpianus, Disputations, Book II.*

It is a question whether, in contracts entered into in good faith, the
father or master should be liable merely for the *peculium*, or for the
entire amount; just as had been discussed in the action on dowry, where
a dowry is given to a son, whether the father can only be sued for the
amount of the *peculium?* I, however, think that the action can be
brought not only for the amount of the *peculium*, but also to the
extent that the woman has been deceived and defrauded by the mali-

cious contrivance of the father; for, if he holds the property and is
not ready to surrender it, it is only just that he should have judgment
rendered against him for the amount that it is worth; for Pomponius said
that what is expressly stated in a case of a slave to whom property has
been given in pledge must also be understood to apply to other
*bona-fide* actions. For if property has been given in pledge to a
slave, the action can be brought not only for the *peculium*, and for
what has been employed in the business of the master, but it has also
this additional sentence: "To the extent that the plaintiff has been
deceived and defrauded by the malicious contrivance of the master." The
master is held to have acted fraudulently if he is unwilling to make
restitution when he has the power to do so.

\37. *Julianus, Digest, Book XII.*

If a creditor of your son appoints you his heir, and you sell the
estate, you will be liable for the *peculium* under this clause of the
stipulation, namely: "Whatever sum of money derived from the estate that
shall come into your hands."

\(1) If you permit your slave to purchase a sub-slave for eight *aurei,
*and he purchases him for ten, and writes to you that he has bought him
for eight, and you allow him to pay eight out of your money, and he pays
ten, you can recover only two *aurei* on this ground, and these will be
made good to the vendor only to the amount of the *peculium* of the
slave.

\(2) I sold to Titius a slave which I held in common either with him or
with Sempronius. Before an action *De peculio* was brought against me
because of said slave, the question arose whether, in a suit on the
*peculium *against Titius or against Sempronius, an account should be
taken of the *peculium* which was in my hands? I stated that, if the
action was brought against Sempronius, under no circumstances, should an
account be taken of the *peculium* in my hands, because he would have no
right of action against me by which he could recover what he had paid.

Moreover, if an action should be brought against Titius more than a year
after I have made the sale, in like manner, the *peculium* in my hands
should not be considered, for an action *De peculio* cannot now be
brought against me. If, however, the action is brought within the year,
then an account ought also to be taken of this *peculium*, for it is
established that where the slave has been alienated, the creditor should
be permitted to proceed against both the vendor and the purchaser.

\(3) Where an action on the *peculium* has been brought against a party
who has an usufruct in the slave, and the creditor has recovered less
than the amount due to him, it is not unjust that he should obtain what
he is entitled to out of the entire *peculium*, whether this is in the
hands of the usufructuary or of the owner. It makes no difference
whether the slave has hired his own services from the usufructuary, or
has borrowed money from him. Therefore, an action should be granted him
against the owner of the property, and that should be

deducted which the slave has, as *peculium*, with reference to the
usufructuary.

\38. *Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.*

I deposited ten *aurei* with a son under paternal control, and I bring
an action of deposit on the *peculium.* Although the son owes the father
nothing, and holds these ten *aurei* he thought, nevertheless, that
judgment should no more be rendered against the father than if there was
no *peculium* besides this, for as this money remains mine, it is not
included in the *peculium.* He also says that if any other person
whosoever brings suit for the *peculium*, there should not be the least
doubt that it must not be computed. Therefore I ought to bring an action
for production, and when the property is produced, bring one to recover
it.

\(1) Where a girl who is about to marry a son under paternal control
promises him a certain sum of money as dowry, and a divorce having been
obtained, she brings an action for the whole amount against the father;
should she be released from the entire promise, or ought what the son
owes the father be deducted? He answered that she should be released
from the entire promise, since if an action was brought against her on
the promise, she could certainly protect herself by the exception based
on malicious intent.

\(2) Stichus has in his *peculium* Pamphilus, who is worth ten *aurei*,
and the said Pamphilus owes the master five *aurei.* If an action on the
*peculium* is brought on account of Stichus, it was held that the value
of Pamphilus should be estimated, and, indeed, the entire value, without
deducting what Pamphilus owes to the master, for no one can be
understood to be himself in his own *peculium;* and therefore in this
instance the master will suffer a loss, just as he would if he had made
a loan to any other of his slaves who had no *peculium.* He says that it
will appear more evident that this is true, if it is stated that the
*peculium *was left to Stichus, who, if he brings suit under the will,
will certainly not be compelled to suffer a deduction for the amount
that his sub-slave owes, unless this is taken out of his own *peculium;*
otherwise the result will be that if the sub-slave owes the master just
as much, and he himself will be understood to have nothing in the
*peculium*, which is certainly absurd.

\(3) I lent money to a slave whom I had sold to you. The question arose
whether the action *De peculio* should be granted to me against you, in
order that what remained in my hands out of the *peculium* should be
deducted. This, in fact, is not in the slightest degree true, nor will
it make any difference whether I institute proceedings within a year
from the time that I made the sale, or afterwards; for, indeed, an
action against me will not be granted to others who contracted with him
at that time. Again, on the other hand, where those who had contracted
previously with this slave bring an action against me, I cannot deduct
what he began to owe me afterwards. From this it is apparent that the
liability of the *peculium* which remained in my hands is not, in any
way, affected by contracts made at a later date.

\39. *Florentinus, Institutes, Book XI.*

The *peculium* also consists of what anyone has saved by his own
economy, or what he has, by the performance of any service, merited as a
gift from someone, where the donor intended that the slave should have
this as his own property.

\40. *Marcianus, Rules, Book V.*

The *peculium* is created, grows, decreases, and dies, and therefore
Papirius Fronto very properly says that the *peculium* resembles a

man.

\(1) The question arose how a *peculium* is created. The ancients made a
distinction in this respect, for if the slave has acquired what the
master was not bound to furnish, this is *peculium*, but if he has
acquired tunics or anything of this kind with which the master is bound
to provide him, it is not *peculium.* Therefore *peculium* is created in
this way, it grows when it is increased, it decreases when sub-slaves
cease to exist or property is destroyed, it dies when it is taken away.

\41. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLIII.*

A slave cannot owe anything, nor can anything be due to a slave; but
when we make a misuse of this word we are rather indicating a fact, than
referring the obligation to the Civil Law. Hence the master can
rightfully demand from strangers what is owing to a slave, and with
respect to what the slave himself owes, an action for this cause is
granted against the master, on the *peculium;* and also to the extent
that property has been employed in the affairs of the master.

\42. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XII.*

Some authorities very properly hold that an action on the *peculium
*should be granted against an arrogator; although Sabinus and Cassius
think that an action on the *peculium* should not be granted on account
of business previously transacted.

\43. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

If, after I have brought an action against you on the *peculium, *and,
before the case has been decided, you have sold a slave; Labeo says that
judgment ought to be rendered against you with reference also to the
*peculium* which he has acquired while in the hands of a purchaser, and
that relief should not be granted you; for this happened through your
own fault since you sold the slave.

\44. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXIII.*

Where anyone has made a contract with a son under paternal control, he
has two debtors, the son for the entire amount, and the father only to
the amount of the *peculium.*

\45. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXI.*

And, therefore, if the father has taken the *peculium* away from the
son, the creditors can, nevertheless, bring suit against the son.

\46. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LX.*

He who grants the management of the *peculium* is understood to permit
generally what he would be willing to permit specifically.

\47. *The Same, On Plautius, Book IV.*

Whenever a notice is placed in a shop as follows: "I forbid any business
to be transacted with my slave Januarius," it is established that the
master has only obtained a release from liability under the Institorian
Action, and not under that on the *peculium.*

\(1) Sabinus gave the opinion that where a slave had become a surety, an
action *De peculio* should not be granted against the master, unless the
security had been furnished for the business of the master, or
concerning property belonging to the *peculium.*

\(2) If the action *De peculio* has once been brought, although when
judgment is rendered there is found to be less in the *peculium* than he
owes, it has, nevertheless, been established that there is no ground for
giving security with reference to a future increase in the *peculium*,
as this takes place in the action on partnership, because the partner
owes the entire amount.

\(3) Where a creditor of the slave has recovered a portion of the debt
from the purchaser, Proculus says that an equitable action can be
brought against the vendor for the remainder, but the plaintiff must not
be allowed, in the beginning, to divide the action, so as to proceed at
the same time against the purchaser and the vendor; since it is enough
that this alone should be granted to him; so that when, having selected
one defendant, he recovers less than the debt, an action will be granted
him against the other, the former action having been rescinded. This is
the modern practice.

\(4) Not only any creditor whosoever can institute proceedings against
the vendor on account of business previously transacted, but the
purchaser himself can also do so, (and this opinion was held by
Julianus), although he himself can make a deduction against another
plaintiff, provided he makes allowance for what he has in his hands.

\(5) Where a slave is sold without his *peculium*, the result is that
the vendor can make use of the deduction; and if, after the sale, the
slave becomes indebted to the vendor, this does not diminish the
*peculium, *because he does not owe his master.

\(6) What we have stated with reference to purchaser and vendor is the
same as if ownership was changed in any other way, as by a legacy or by
the gift of a dowry; for the *peculium* of the slave, wherever it may
be, is understood to resemble the property of a freeman.

\48. *The Same, On Plautius, Book XVII.*

The free management of the *peculium* does not remain in the case of a
fugitive or of a slave who has been stolen, nor in case of one who is
not known to be either alive or dead.

\(1) Anyone, to whom the management of the *peculium* has been given,
can substitute his own debtor.

\49. *Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book IV.*

Not only is that *peculium* which an owner has granted to his slave, but
also whatever has been acquired without his knowledge, but which, if he
had known of it, he would have permitted to be in the *peculium.*

\(1) If my slave, without my knowledge, transacts my business, he will
be considered to be my debtor to the same extent as he would have been
liable, if, being a freeman, he had attended to it.

\(2) In order that a slave may be considered a debtor to the master or
the master to the slave, attention must be paid to the regulations of
the Civil Law; and therefore, if the master has stated in his account
that he is indebted to his slave, when, in fact, neither had he borrowed
money, nor had any other cause for debt previously existed, the mere
statement of account does not render him a debtor.

\50. *Papinianus, Questions, Book IX.*

At the time when there is nothing in the *peculium*, the father conceals
himself, I, being about to bring an action *De peculio* against him,
cannot be placed in possession of his property for the purpose of
preserving it, because he who would be entitled to be discharged from
liability if he had joined issue, is not concealing himself for the
purpose of committing fraud. Nor does it make any difference if it
should happen that a judgment against him may result; for, also, if a
debt is due at a certain time, or under some condition, the party is not
held to conceal himself on account of fraud, although he may be unjustly
condemned by the judge. Julianus, however, thinks that a surety given at
the time when there is nothing in the *peculium* is liable, since the
surety can be accepted for a future right of action if he is accepted in

this way.

\(1) If a creditor appoints as heir a father who is liable on the
*peculium*, since the time of death is regarded with a view to the
operation of *Lex Falcidia*, the *peculium* in existence at that time
will be taken into consideration.

\(2) Even after the master has been sued on the *peculium*, a surety can
be taken in behalf of the slave; and therefore, for the same reason as
that for which if a slave should pay the money after issue has been
joined in an action, he cannot recover it any more than if issue had not
been joined, a surety will be held to have been lawfully accepted,
because the natural obligation, which even a slave is held to incur, is
not made an issue in the controversy.

\(3) A slave belonging to another, while he was serving me in good
faith, paid me money borrowed from Titius, in order that I might manumit
him, and I did so; the creditor asked whom he could sue on the
*peculium.* I said that, although in other instances the creditor would
have the choice, yet in the one stated suit should be brought against
the master, and he could bring an action against me for production of
the money which had been obtained by him, and had not been alienated on
account of the transaction which was said to have taken place with
reference to the civil condition of the slave; nor should the
distinction of those be admitted who think that if I do not manu-

mit the slave, the money should belong to his master, but if the
manumission takes place, the money is deemed to have been acquired by
me, since it is given to me, rather on account of my business, than as
being derived from my property.

\51. *Scævola, Questions, Book II.*

With reference to what is due to a slave from strangers, the master
should, by no means, have judgment rendered against him for the amount
of the debt, where anyone brings suit on the *peculium;* since both the
expense incurred in bringing the action and the result of the execution
may be uncertain, and the delay of time granted to those who have been
held judicially liable, or that consumed in the sale of the property,
should be considered, if this is the better thing to do; therefore, if
the party is ready to assign his rights of action he will be discharged.

What is said where an action is brought against one of several partners,
namely: that the entire *peculium* must be computed, because the
proceeding is against the partner, will have the same result if the
party is ready to assign his rights of action; and, in the case of all
those whom we say are liable on this account since they have a right of
action, the substitution takes the place of legal payment.

\52. *Paulus, Questions, Book IV.*

*A* question is asked with reference to an actual occurrence, namely: .
where a party who was administering a guardianship as a freeman was
pronounced to be a slave, whether, if his master was sued by the ward
whose claim has been stated by rescript to be preferable to those of
other creditors of the slave, what is owing to the master should be
deducted from the *peculium.* And if you think it can be deducted,
whether it makes any difference if he became indebted to the master
while he was still enjoying his freedom, or afterwards; and will the
action on the *peculium* lie in favor of a boy who has not reached
puberty? I answered that no privileged claim could take preference over
that of the father or master, if he was sued on the *peculium* on
account of the son or the slave. It is evident that in the case of other
creditors account should be taken of privileged claims, for what if a
son has received a dowry or has managed a guardianship? This has been
very properly stated in a rescript, with reference to a slave who was
acting as guardian, and, for the reason that the position of the more
diligent creditor is usually better than that of the others, so far as
they are concerned, the action will be barred. Clearly if he has loaned
money out of property belonging to the ward or has deposited money in a
chest,^1^ an action for the recovery of the same will be granted him, as
well as an equitable action against the debtor; that is to say, if they
have used up the money, for he had no power to alienate it. This also
should be held in the case of any guardian.

Nor do I think it makes any difference whether, when he became indebted
to the master, he was in possession of his freedom, or whether

^1^ That is to say with a banker.  ED.

this happened subsequently; for if I make a loan to the slave of Titius,
and then become his master, I can deduct what I have previously lent
him, if suit is brought against me on the *peculium.* What course must
then be pursued? Since proceedings cannot be instituted on the
*peculium*, an equitable action founded on that on guardianship, should
be granted against the master, so that what this party had as his own
property may be understood to be his *peculium.*

\(1) If a dowry is given to a son under paternal control, or he has
administered a guardianship, an account should be taken of the
privileged claims in an action on the *peculium*, and, in the meantime,
continuance having been granted in the action of other creditors, or
security furnished, if those who have no privilege institute proceedings
first, what they have received shall be restored, if suit on the
privileged claim is afterwards brought against the father.

\53. *The Same, Questions, Book XL*

If Stichus was not deprived of the *peculium* when he was manumitted, it
is held to have been granted; he cannot, however, sue debtors unless the
rights of action have been assigned to him.

\54. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

A testator bequeathed to one of his heirs, in addition to his share,
certain lands already equipped, together with the slaves; these slaves
were the debtors of the master. The question arose whether an action on
the *peculium *would lie against him in favor of the other heir? The
answer was that it would not.

\55. *Neratius, Opinions, Book I.*

He whom I was suing on the *peculium* was forcibly carried away by you;
what was the *peculium* at the time that you removed him by force must
be considered.

\56. *Paulus, On Neratius, Book II.*

What my slave has promised to pay to me for one of my debtors should be
deducted from the *peculium*, and is, nevertheless, due from the debtor.
But let us see whether the obligation of him for whom the promise was
made should not be held to become a part of the *peculium.* Paulus says
that if, when anyone brings an action on the *peculium* the master
wishes to deduct this, he undoubtedly makes the claim part of the
*peculium.*

\57. *Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book VIII.*

Where a son or a slave, with reference to whom an action on the
*peculium* alone has been brought, dies before the case is terminated,
that *peculium* will be taken into consideration which any of the
parties possessed when he died.

\(1) Julianus says that where anyone by his will directs that his slave
shall be freed, and bequeaths to him his *peculium*, he is understood to
bequeath it at the time when he becomes free; and therefore all increase
of the *peculium*, of whatever description, acquired before the estate
was entered on, will belong to the manumitted slave.

\(2) But where anyone bequeaths the *peculium* of the slave to a
stranger, the question is as to the supposed intention of the testator;
and the more probable opinion is, that whatever was in the *peculium at*
the time of his death is bequeathed, with the understanding that any
accessions which may be made to the property of the *peculium* when the
estate is entered upon, as, for instance, the offspring of female slaves
and the increase of flocks, are owing, but that whatever was given to
the slave or he acquires by his own labor, does not belong to the
legatee.

\58. *Scævola, Digest, Book V.*

*A* party left to one of his heirs certain lands as they were equipped,
together with slaves and other property, and whatever was there. These
slaves were indebted to the master with reference to their monthly
accounts, as well as for other reasons. The question arose whether the
action on the *peculium* would lie in favor of the other heirs against
him for the money owed by them? The answer was that it would not lie.

TITLE II.

WHEN THE ACTION ON THE PECULIUM IS LIMITED TO A

YEAR.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The Prætor says: "After the death of him who was under the control of
another, or after he has been emancipated, manumitted, or alienated, I
will grant an action only to the amount of the *peculium*, within a year
from the time when proceedings could first have been instituted with
reference to the matter, where anything has been done through the
malicious intent of him under whose control the party was, on account of
which the value of the *peculium* is diminished."

\(1) So long as the slave or the son is under control, the action on the
*peculium* is not limited by time, but after his death, or after he has
been emancipated, manumitted, or alienated, it becomes limited by time,
that is to say to a year.

\(2) The year will, however, be computed to the extent that it is
available, and therefore Julianus says that if the obligation is
conditional, the year must be computed, not from the time when the party
was emancipated, but from that at which, if the condition was complied
with, suit could be brought.

\(3) The Prætor, with good reason, made the action temporary in this
instance, for, as the *peculium* is extinguished by death or alienation,
it is sufficient for the obligation to be extended for a year.

\(4) Alienation and manumission, however, relate to slaves, and not to
sons, but death refers to slaves as well as sons, emancipation, however,
to sons alone. Moreover, if he ceases to be under control in some other
way, without emancipation, the action will only lie for the term of a
year. Also if the son becomes his own master through the

death or deportation of his father, the heir of his father, or the
Treasury, will be liable to the action on the *peculium* within a year.

\(5) In case of alienation, a vendor is undoubtedly included, who is
liable to an action on the *peculium* within a year.

\(6) But also, if he has given away the slave, or exchanged him, or
bestowed him by way of dowry, he is in the same position.

\(7) So, likewise, is the heir of one who has bequeathed the slave, but
not with his *peculium;* for if he had bequeathed him with his
*peculium*, or had directed him to be free, a question might arise; and
it seems to me to be the better opinion that the action *De peculio*
should not be granted against a manumitted slave, nor against him to
whom the *peculium* was bequeathed. Will the heir then be liable?
Cæcilius says that he will be liable, because the *peculium* is in the
hands of him who released himself from obligation by delivering it to
the legatee.

Pegasus, however, says that security should be furnished to the heir by
him to whom the *peculium* has been bequeathed, because the creditors
apply to him, and therefore if he delivers it without security, suit can
be brought against him.

\(8) Where the heir is asked to deliver up the estate the slave and the
*peculium* being reserved, and an action on the *peculium* is brought
against him, he cannot make use of the Trebellian exception; as
Marcellus, when discussing this point, admits. He, however, to whom the
estate is delivered, is not liable, as Scævola says, since he has not
the *peculium*, nor has committed any fraudulent act to avoid having it.

\(9) Pomponius also, in the Sixty-first Book, says that if an usufruct
is extinguished, the action should be granted against the usufructuary
within a year.

\(10) The question was raised by Labeo whether if you, during the
lifetime of the son whom you believed to be dead, brought an action,
and, because the year had elapsed, were defeated by an exception; you
should be permitted to again institute proceedings after the mistake had
been discovered? He says you should be permitted to do so only for the
amount of the *peculium*, but not for what had been employed for the
benefit of the property of the other party; for in the former case the
action with reference to any advantage which had been obtained by its
employment was properly brought, because the exception based on the
lapse of a year relates to the *peculium*, and not to what had been used
for the benefit of the property.

\2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Since, after the death of a son under paternal control, an action,
limited to a year, will lie against the father, just as a perpetual
action will lie during the lifetime of the son; therefore, if an action
*De peculio, *in a case involving a rescission of contract, is brought,
it must be within six months after the death of the son; and the same
should be said with reference to all other actions which are of a
temporary character.

\(1) Where a slave, to whom money has been loaned, is in the hands of
the enemy, the action on the *peculium* against the master is not

limited to a year, so long as the slave can return under the law of
*postliminium.*

\3. *Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book IV.*

The term *peculium* must sometimes be employed even if the slave has
ceased to exist in the course of nature, and the Prætor grants an action
on the *peculium* within a year; for, in this instance also, both
increase and diminution are to be taken into consideration, as belonging
to the *peculium*, although it has ceased to exist, as such, through the
death or manumission of the slave; so that there may be an accession to
it as to a *peculium*, by crops, or by the yield of flocks, or by the
offspring of female slaves, and a diminution, as, for instance, where an
animal has died, or has been lost in any other way.

TITLE III.

CONCERNING THE ACTION BASED ON THE ADVANTAGE

DERIVED BY A FATHER OR A MASTER WITH REFERENCE

TO HIS PROPERTY.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where those who are under the control of another have nothing in the
*peculium*, or have something, but not the entire amount; the persons
having them under their control are liable if what was received has been
used for the benefit of their property, the contract being held to have
been rather made with them.

\(1) Nor does the action having reference to the employment of property
in the affairs of another, seem to have been promised without effect, as
that on the *peculium* would be sufficient; for Labeo very properly says
that the property may be so applied, and the action on the *peculium*
not be applicable; for what should be done if the owner had taken away
the *peculium *without malicious intent? What if the *peculium* is put
an end to by the death of the slave, and the year in which the suit can
be brought has elapsed? For the suit having reference to the employment
of property in the affairs of another is perpetual, and will lie whether
the party has taken away the *peculium* without malicious intent, or the
action on the *peculium *is terminated by the lapse of a year.

\(2) Moreover, if several are bringing suits on the *peculium*, he
should be benefited whose money has been employed in the business of the
master, so that he will have the more profitable action. If someone has
come forward and brought an action on the *peculium*, it should
certainly be considered whether the action founded on the employment of
property for another's benefit will not lie. Pomponius states that
Julianus is of the opinion that the action on the ground of the
employment of property for another's benefit is destroyed by the action
on the *peculium*, because what has been employed for the benefit of the
master and paid on account of the slave, has been bought into the
*peculium*, just as if it had been paid by the master to the slave
himself, but only

so far as the master has paid in the action on the *peculium* what the
slave had used in his affairs; otherwise, if he has not paid it, the
action based on the employment of the property remains.

\2. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XII.*

The action founded on the employment of property for another's benefit
cannot be brought against anyone who has liberated a slave in
consideration of money received; because, by granting him his freedom,
he is not enriched by the money.

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

If, however, the slave pays his master a certain sum of money which he
has borrowed from me, in order that he may be manumitted, the said sum
of money should not be computed as forming part of the *peculium*, but
there is held to have been employed in the business of the master any
amount in excess of the value of the slave which the

latter paid.

\(1) Property is held to have been employed in the business of the
master, if the slave uses in his master's business the very article
which he received; as, for instance (where he received wheat and used it
up as food for the slaves of his master) or where he pays to one
creditor of his master money which he has borrowed from another
creditor. But if he made a mistake in paying, and thought a party to be
a creditor who was not one, Pomponius says in the Sixty-first Book that
this also is property employed for the benefit of the master, so far as
the right of the latter to recover it as not being due is concerned; or
where the slave, for the sake of transacting or managing the business of
his master, performed any act (for example, if he borrowed money for the
purpose of purchasing grain for the maintenance of his slaves, or in
order to clothe them) or, when, having borrowed for the *peculium*, he
afterwards uses the money for his master's benefit; for the law which is
at present in force provides that there may be an action on the ground
of property employed for another's benefit, even though he employs it at
first for the benefit of the *peculium*, and afterwards in the business
of his master.

\(2) We state, as a general rule, that an action founded on the
employment of property in the business of another will lie in those
cases in which an agent would be entitled to an action on mandate, or a
person who had transacted business without being empowered to do so,
could bring suit on the ground of voluntary agency; and wherever the
slave has consumed anything in order that the property of the owner
might be improved, or not deteriorated.

\(3) Thus, if a slave has obtained money in order to support, feed, and
clothe himself, according to the custom of his master, that is to say,
to the extent to which his master was in the habit of furnishing him
with these necessaries; Labeo states that he will be held to employ the
money for his master's benefit and therefore this will be the case with
reference to a son.

\(4) But where, having borrowed money, he adorns his master's house with
stucco work and certain other things which are more for the purpose of
pleasure than for that of utility, he will not be held to have employed
the money in this manner; for the reason that an agent could not have
charged this, unless he had happened to have the order of the master or
his consent, nor should the master be burdened on account of what he
himself would not have done. What course then should be pursued? The
master should permit the creditor to remove these things  of course
without injury to the house  lest the owner should be forced to sell it
in order to make good the amount by which its value had been increased.

\(5) Labeo also says that if a slave having borrowed money from me lends
it to another, the owner is liable to the action based on property used
for another's benefit, because an obligation has been acquired by him;
and this opinion is approved by Pomponius, if he did not make the
obligation a liability of the *peculium*, but treated it as acquired on
the account of his master. For which reason the master will be bound to
the extent that if he did not think it was advantageous to himself to
hold the obligation of the debtor, he could assign the rights of action
to his creditor, and make him his agent.

\(6) Labeo says that it is also an instance of the employment of
property for the business of the master where a slave, having borrowed
money, uses it with his master's consent to purchase articles of luxury,
for example, ointments, or anything which he may have obtained for
pleasure, or for some dishonorable purpose; for we do not consider
whether what was consumed was for the good of the master, but whether it
was employed in his affairs.

\(7) Hence, it is very properly said also that if a slave has procured
grain for the purpose of feeding the slaves of his master, and has
deposited the same in his master's granary, and it has been destroyed,
or spoiled, or burned, it is held to have been employed in the affairs
of the master.

\(8) Moreover, if he purchased a necessary slave for his master, and the
slave died, or he propped up a building and it fell down; I should say
that an action for property employed for the benefit of another will
lie.

\(9) Where, however, he received it for the purpose of employing it in
the affairs of his master, but did not do so, and deceived the creditor;
it is not held to be so employed, nor is the master liable, lest the
credulity of the creditor prejudice the master or the craftiness of the
slave injure him. What, however, would be the case if the slave was one
who was in the habit of employing what he received in the affairs of his
master? Even in this instance, I do not think that this injures a master
if the slave receives it with a different intention, or if he received
it with this intention but afterwards employed it for another purpose;
since the creditor should be careful to ascertain the way in which it
was employed.

\(10) If the slave borrowed money for the purpose of purchasing clothing
and the money is lost, who can bring the action for property

employed for the benefit of another, the creditor or the vendor? I
think, however, that if the price has been paid, the creditor will be
entitled to the action based on the ground of property employed for
another's benefit, even though the clothing has been destroyed; but if
the price has not been paid, but the money was given for the purpose
that clothing should be purchased, and the money was lost, but the
clothing has been divided among the slaves, the creditor will
undoubtedly be entitled to the action for money employed in the business

of another.

But has not the vendor also a right of action, because his property has
been used in the affairs of the master? Reason demands that he should be
liable, hence the result is that the master will be liable to two
parties on account of one transaction. Therefore, even if both the money
and the clothing have been destroyed, it must be said that the master
will be liable to both, since both intended to employ the articles in
his affairs.

\4. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

But it must be said that the position of the more diligent party should
be the better one, for it is unjust that the master should have judgment
rendered against him in favor of both on the ground of the employment of
property for his benefit.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

If a slave purchases articles, which are not necessary, as if they were
required by his master, as, for instance, slaves; Pomponius says that
they will be held to have been employed in his affairs to the extent of
the true value of the slaves; but if he should purchase articles which
were really necessary, the master will be held liable for the entire
amount for which they were sold.

\(1) He also says that, whether the master ratifies the contract of the
slave or not, the action on the ground of property employed for his

benefit will lie.

\(2) An action based on his order can be brought for what the slave
purchased for his master, if he did so at his desire, but if he did not
make the purchase at his desire, but the master indeed ratified his act;
or, on the other hand, if he purchased something necessary or beneficial
to the master, an action for property employed for his benefit will lie;
but if none of these conditions exist, an action on the

*peculium* will lie.

\(3) It is established that not only the money which passes at once from
the creditor to the master is employed for the benefit of the latter,
but also that which was in the *peculium* in the first place. This,
however, is true in every instance in which the slave transacting his
master's business makes him more wealthy with the money of the
*peculium.* Otherwise, if the master deprives the slave of the
*peculium*, or sells him along with it, or disposes of the property
belonging to the *peculium* and collects the price of the same, this is
not held to be employed in the business of the master.

\6. *Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book I.*

For, if this were true, he would be liable to the action for property
employed for his benefit, even before he sold what composed the
*peculium; *because by this very fact that the slave had the property in
the *peculium* he would become more wealthy, which is manifestly false.

\7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

And, therefore, also, if the slave gives his master things forming part
of the *peculium*, the action for property employed in his affairs will
not lie; and this is true.

\(1) It is evident that, if the slave should borrow money, and pay it to
his master with the intention of giving it to him; provided he does not
wish to make him a debtor to the *peculium*, an action for property
employed in the affairs of the master can be brought.

\(2) What Mela says is not true, namely, that if you give silver to my
slave in order that he may make cups out of any silver he chooses, and
then, after the cups have been made, the slave dies; you will be
entitled to an action for property employed for the benefit of another
against me, since I can bring an action to recover the cups.

\(3) What Labeo says is entirely true, that is, if the slave purchases
perfumes and ointments and uses them at a funeral which concerned his
master, he will be held to have employed them in his master's business.

\(4) He also says that if I purchase from your slave an estate which
belonged to you, and I pay money to the creditors, and then you deprive
me of said estate, I can recover it by an action on purchase; for it
would be held that it was employed in your affairs. Moreover, if I
purchase an estate from a slave in order that I may set off what is due
to me from said slave, even though I paid nothing, still I can recover
in an action on purchase what has come into the hands of the master.

I, however, do not think that the purchaser is entitled to an action for
property employed in the business of another, unless the slave had the
intention of employing it in his master's affairs.

\(5) If a son under paternal control, having borrowed money, gives it as
dowry for his daughter, it is held to have been employed in the affairs
of his father to the extent that the grandfather was about to give the
dowry for the granddaughter. This opinion seems to me to be correct,
only where he gave the money with the intention of transacting the
business of his father.

\8. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

And Pomponius says that it makes no difference whether he gives it for
his daughter, or his sister, or a granddaughter, the issue of another
son. We shall, therefore, say the same where a slave has borrowed money,
and given it as dowry, on account of the daughter of his master.

\9. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XII.*

If, indeed, the father was not about to give a dowry, it is not held to
have been employed in his business.

\10. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where a son has become surety for his father and has paid the creditor,
he is held to have employed the money in the affairs of his father,
because he released the latter from liability.

\(1) What Papinianus states in the Ninth Book of Questions is an
instance similar to this, namely: where a son undertook the conduct of a
case as the voluntary defender of his father, and judgment was rendered
against him, his father is liable to an action for property employed in
his behalf, for the son released him from liability by undertaking his
defence.

\(2) Papinianus also discusses the case in which I stipulated with the
son for what the father was compelled to pay, and then I brought suit
against the son; for, in this instance, also, an action will lie for
money employed for another's benefit, unless the son, when he bound
himself, intended to make a gift to his father.

\(3) Wherefore, it can be said that if he appears in an action on the
*peculium* as the defender of his father, the latter will be liable to
the action for property employed for his benefit, to the extent of the
*peculium; *and the benefit to be derived from this opinion will be that
if the action *De peculio* should be terminated, he can be sued in that
for money employed for his benefit. I think that the father is liable to
an action for money employed for his benefit, even before an adverse
decision was rendered, after issue has been joined in behalf of the

father.

\(4) Property is held to have been employed in the affairs of a father
to the extent that any use of the same is made; and hence if a part has
been employed, an action can be brought for that part.

\(5) But will the master be held liable only for the principal, or for
the interest as well? And, indeed, if the slave promised interest,
Marcellus states in the Fifth Book of the Digest that the master must
pay it, but if he did not promise it, it certainly is not due, because
it was not included in the agreement. It is evident that if I, having
the master in mind, paid money to a slave who was not managing his
master's business, but I myself was managing it, I shall be able to
institute proceedings to collect the interest also, by an action based
on voluntary agency.

\(6) We understand property to be employed in the business of a master
when it continues to be so employed; and hence an action on the ground
of property employed in his affairs will only lie where payment has not
been made by the master to the slave or the son. If, however, this has
been done to the prejudice of the creditor, that is to say, if the money
has been paid to the slave or the son who is liable to lose it, since it
has been paid, it ceases to have been employed for this purpose; but it
is perfectly just that the action on the ground of malicious intent
should lie either against the father or the master; for a

debtor to the *peculium*, also, is not released from liability, if he
fraudulently pays the slave what he owed him.

\(7) Where the slave is a debtor of the master, and, having borrowed
money from another pays him; he does not employ it in the business of
the latter to the extent to which he is indebted to him, but he does so
as far as the excess is concerned. Hence, if, when he owed his master
thirty *aurei, *having borrowed forty, he paid the sum to his creditor,
or spent it on the slaves; it must be said that an action for the
employment of money in the business of another to the amount of ten
*aurei* will lie; but if he owes the whole amount, it is not held to
have been employed in this manner; for, (as Pomponius says), it is
considered that relief is granted against the profit of the master, and
therefore, if he was indebted to the master when he used the property in
his affairs, it is held that nothing was employed for that purpose, but
if afterwards he became indebted to him, it ceases to be employed for
that purpose; and the same rule will apply if he should pay him.

He says moreover, that if a master makes him a present of an amount
equal to that which he paid the creditor in his behalf, and this was
done with the intention of remunerating him, the money will not be held
to have been employed for his benefit. If, however, he gave it to him in
any other way, the use of the money for this purpose will still exist.

\(8) He also makes the following inquiry. If he employed ten *aurei *in
the business of his master, and afterwards borrowed the same amount from
the latter, and, in addition to this, he has a *peculium* of ten *aurei,
*should it be considered that the employment of the money in his
master's affairs has ceased? Or shall we, indeed, not take away the
right of action for property employed in his affairs, as there is
*peculium* from which the debt can be paid; or should we preferably make
the deduction from each, *pro rata?* I think, however, that the action
for money employed for the benefit of the master has ceased to be
available, since he has become a debtor to the master.

\(9) He also asks whether, if he has employed money in your affairs, and
has become your debtor, and then your creditor for the same amount that
he owed you, the action based on the employment of money for the benefit
of another is revived, or whether it cannot be reestablished
retroactively? The latter opinion is correct.

\(10) He also discusses the point whether a son can employ property in
the affairs of his father in accordance with what may transpire; for
example, if the father and son are co-debtors, and the son, having
borrowed money, pays it in his own behalf; or if you have lent money to
the son under the direction of the father, and the son has paid you the
debt. It seems to me that if the money had actually come into the hands
of the father, it will be held to have been employed in his business;
but if this was not the case, and the son paid while transacting his own
affairs, an action on the ground of property employed in the business of
another will not lie.

\11. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Whatever a slave has borrowed for this purpose, namely, in order to pay
it to his own creditor, will not be employed in his master's business,
although the latter is released from liability to an action on the
*peculium.*

\12. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

If a son under paternal control or a slave purchases land for his father
or master, this will be held to have been employed in his affairs; but
in this way, that, if it was worth less than the sum for which it was
purchased, it would be held to have been employed in his business to the
amount of what it is worth; if, however, it is worth more, no greater
sum will be held to have been employed for that purpose than that for
which it was purchased.

\13. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

If property has been used in the business of one of two masters, the
question arises whether he alone for whose benefit it was employed can
be sued, or his partner as well? Julianus says that he alone should be
sued in whose affairs the money was employed, just as where he alone
directed the contract to be made; and I think this opinion to be
correct.

\14. *Julianus, Digest, Book XI.*  *Note by Marcellus. *Sometimes,
also, the action for property employed in the affairs of

another can be brought against one joint-owner; for the reason that such
employment of property has taken place, and he, having been sued, can
recover from his partner the amount for which judgment has been rendered
against him. What shall we say, however, if the slave has been deprived
of the *peculium *by one of the owners? Paulus says that this question
only arises where an action on the *peculium* does not lie.

\15. *Ulpianus, Disputations, Book II.*

Where a son under paternal control has agreed to pay what his father
owed, it should be considered whether the action for the employment of
property in the affairs of another ought to be granted. He did not,
however, release his father, for he who makes such an agreement binds
himself, indeed, but does not discharge his father from liability. It is
evident that, if he pays after making the agreement, although he may be
held to have done so in his own behalf, that is on account of his having
made the agreement, he will, nevertheless, be properly said to have
employed the property in the affairs of his father.

\16. *Alfenus, Digest, Book II.*

A certain party leased a tract of land to his slave for cultivation, and
gave him oxen, and as these oxen were unsuitable for the work,

he ordered them to be sold and others to be obtained by means of the
money received. The slave sold the oxen, and bought others, but did not
pay the money to the vendor, and afterwards became financially
embarrassed. He who sold the oxen brought suit against the master in an
action on the *peculium, *and for money which had been employed in his
business, as the oxen on account of which the money was demanded were in
possession of the master.

The answer was, that no *peculium* was held to exist, except what
remained after what the slave owed to the master had been deducted, and
that it seemed to him that the oxen were, in fact, employed in the
master's affairs, but that he had paid on this account the amount that
the first oxen had been sold for; and that judgment should be rendered
against the master for the excess of the value of the last oxen.

\17. *Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.*

A slave, having borrowed money for the business of his master, lost it
without negligence; it was held that, notwithstanding this, an action
for money employed in the business of another could be brought against
the master. For, in like manner, if my agent, being about to spend money
in my business, and having borrowed money lost it without negligence, he
can properly bring an action against me on the ground of mandate, or on
that of business transacted.

\(1) I entered into a contract with Stichus the sub-slave of your slave
Pamphilus; the action on the *peculium* and that for property employed
in the affairs of another ought to be granted in such a way that
whatever had been employed in your business or with reference to the
*peculium* of Pamphilus, should be included in the same; that is to say,
even if it was brought after Stichus had died, or been alienated.

If, however, I bring suit after the death of Pamphilus, the better
opinion is that, even though Stichus may be living, still, with
reference to what has been employed for the benefit of the *peculium* of
Pamphilus, the action should not be granted, except within a year from
the time when he died; for I should then be held to be, as it were,
instituting proceedings with reference to the *peculium* of Pamphilus,
just as where I brought suit for what I lent by his direction.

It should not concern us that Stichus, on whose *peculium* suit is
brought, is living, since this property cannot be in his *peculium,
*unless that of Pamphilus still remains. The same principle will compel
us to hold that what has been employed for the benefit of the *peculium*
of Pamphilus, must be made good in such a way that what Pamphilus owes
you shall first be deducted, but what has actually been used in your
business shall be made good even if what Pamphilus owes you had not been
deducted.

\18. *Neratius, Parchments, Book VII.*

Although you have become surety for my slave in a contract which was
made with reference to my business, for example, if where a slave had
purchased grain for the maintenance of the entire body of slaves, you
gave security to the vendor of the grain; still, the better opinion

is that you may bring the action *De peculio* on this account, but not
an action based on the employment of property in the affairs of another;
so that an action on the latter ground will lie in any contract solely
in favor of the person who loaned the very property which has been
employed in the affairs of the matter.

\19. *Paulus, Questions, Book IV.*

A son under paternal control purchased a toga; and afterwards, having
died, his father being ignorant of the fact, and supposing it to be his,
used it at his funeral. Neratius states in the Second Book of Opinions
that this is held to be employment of property in the affairs of the
father, but that, in the action on the *peculium*, what does not exist
should be computed only in one instance, that is where this is
occasioned by the malicious fraud of him against whom suit is

brought.

If, however, the father was obliged to purchase a toga for his son, it
was employed in the affairs of his father, not now when it was used at
the funeral, but at the time he purchased it, for the funeral of the son
is a debt of the father. Neratius, also, who thought that the father was
liable on the ground of property employed in his business, explains that
this transaction (that is to say the burial and the funeral of the son)
constitute a debt of the father and not of the son. He, therefore,
having become a debtor to the *peculium*, although the property is not
in existence, can also be sued on the *peculium;* and in this action is
also included what has been employed in his affairs; which addition is,
however necessary, after a year has elapsed from the death of the son.

\20. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

A father promised a dowry for his daughter and agreed that he would
support her; and, as he did not keep his promise, the daughter borrowed
money from her husband, and died during marriage. I gave it as my
opinion that, if what had been lent had been expended for something
without which she could not support herself, or could not maintain her
father's slaves, an equitable action should be granted on the ground of
property employed in the business of the father.

\(1) The slave of a party who was absent on public business lent money
to the slaves of a ward, the guardian signing the stipulation, which
stated that the latter was responsible for the contract. The question
arose whether an action would lie against the ward? I answered that, if
the property was given for the business of the ward it was employed for
that purpose; and although, in order that the contract with reference to
the slaves might be the better confirmed, the guardian had made the
promise, it should, nevertheless, be said that an action for property
employed in the business of another might be brought against the ward.

\21. *The Same, Digest, Book V.*

A man married a girl under paternal control, the father having promised
a dowry, and it was agreed between all the parties that either

the father, or she herself, should meet the expenses of her support. The
husband lent her money, as he very properly thought that the father
would give her an allowance to the amount that he had proposed to give
his daughter. She used this money for necessary purposes for herself and
for the slaves which she had with her, and the management of his
domestic affairs having been committed to her, she used a certain amount
of the money of her husband for the same purpose. Then, before the
father had paid the allowance, the daughter died, the father refused to
pay the expenses, and the husband retained the property of his wife.

I ask whether an action for money employed for his benefit will lie
against the father? The answer was that if what was lent was expended
for articles without which she could not maintain herself, or support
the slaves of her father, an equitable action for property employed for
another's benefit should be granted.

TITLE IV.

CONCERNING THE ACTION BASED ON THE AUTHORIZATION OP THE FATHER OR THE
MASTER.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

An action is very properly granted against a master for the entire
amount, on the ground that he has authorized a contract; for, to a
certain extent, a contract is entered into with the party who ordered it
to be made.

\(1) Authority must, however, be understood, whether anyone gives it in
the presence of a witness, or by a letter, or verbally, or by a
messenger, or whether the authority was given in a specified contract,
or in general terms; and therefore, if a party made a statement as
follows: "Transact what business you desire with my slave Stichus, at my
risk," he is held to have directed that everything be done, unless a
special agreement prohibits something.

\(2) I ask, however, whether he can revoke this sanction before a debt
is incurred. I think that he can do so, just as if he had given a
mandate, and afterwards, having changed his mind, before the contract
had been made, he had revoked the mandate and notified me.

\(3) Also, if a father or a master has given a mandate, he is held to
have conferred authority.

\(4) And, moreover, if a master has signed the written contract of the
slave, he will be liable in the proceeding aforesaid.

\(5) But what if he becomes surety for the slave? Marcellus says that he
is not liable to this action, for he intervened as a stranger; and he
does not say this for the reason that the master is liable on the ground
of security, but because to give authority is one thing, and to become
surety is another; and he further says that even though the security may
be worthless, he will not be liable on account of having given
authority; and this is the more correct opinion.

\(6) If anyone should ratify a transaction made by his slave or his son,
an action on this ground will be granted against him.

\(7) Where a ward, who is the owner, grants authority, he is undoubtedly
not liable, unless he did so with the consent of his guardian.

\(8) Where a contract is entered into with a slave by authority of the
usufructuary, or with that of a person whom he is serving in good faith
as a slave; Marcellus thinks that this action should be granted against
him, and I also approve this opinion.

\(9) Where a contract is entered into with a slave by authority of the
curator of a minor, or of an insane person, or of a spendthrift; Labeo
thinks that the action should be granted against the party whose slave
he was, and the same applies to a veritable agent. If, however, the
latter is not a genuine agent, Labeo also says that the action should
preferably be granted against the party himself.

\2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where a loan is made to the slave of a ward, with the sanction of his
guardian, if the loan was for the benefit of the ward, I think that an
action on the ground of the guardian's sanction should be granted
against the ward.

\(1) Where a loan is made by the authority of the master of a female
slave, or by that of the father of a girl, an action on this ground
should be granted against him.

\(2) If a contract is made with a slave of another by my authority, and
I afterwards purchase the slave, I will not be liable to this action;
lest a proceeding which, in the beginning, was of no effect, be rendered
valid by the occurrence.

\3. *Ulpianus, Opinions, Book II.*

A master who has directed money to be loaned to his slave at six per
cent interest, is liable for the amount which he has authorized; and an
obligation of pledge does not affect lands which a slave has encumbered
without the consent of his master.

\4. *The Same, On the Edict, Book X.*

If any business is transacted with a slave belonging to a city, by the
authority of the official appointed for the management of its affairs,
Pomponius says that an action on this ground can be brought against him.

\5. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book IV.*

If a master, or a father, being about to receive a loan of money,
directs it to be paid to his slave or his son, there is no doubt that a
personal suit for recovery can be brought against him, himself; and it
is certain that, in this instance, the present action will not lie.

\(1) Where one of the masters of a slave directed a contract to be
entered into with him, he alone will be liable; but if two directed this
to be done, an action can be brought against either of them for the
entire amount, because they resemble two parties who have given a
mandate.
