BOOK XIV.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE ACTION AGAINST THE OWNER OF A SHIP............
200

TITLE II. CONCERNING THE RHODIAN LAW OF JETTISON .......................
207

TITLE III. CONCERNING THE INSTITORIAN ACTION
............................. 212

TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE TRIBUTORIAN ACTION ............................
219

TITLE V.

CONCERNING TRANSACTIONS SAID TO HAVE TAKEN PLACE WITH A PERSON UNDER THE
CONTROL OF ANOTHER......................... 225

TITLE VI. CONCERNING THE MACEDONIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE ..............
228



THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XIV.

TITLE I.

CONCERNING THE ACTION AGAINST THE OWNER OP A SHIP. 1. *Ulpianus, On the
Edict, Book XXVIII.*

There is no one who is ignorant of the benefit of this Edict, for
sometimes we enter into agreements with the masters of vessels
concerning the necessities of the voyage, without being aware of their
civil status or character; and it was only just that the party who
appointed the master of a ship should be liable, just as one who has
placed an agent in charge of a shop or a business; since, in fact, there
is greater necessity in making the contract with the master than with an
ordinary agent, as circumstances permit anyone to make an investigation
of the standing of an agent, and contract with him accordingly; but this
is not the case with a master of a ship, for frequently neither the
place nor the time permits a satisfactory decision to be reached.

\(1) We must understand the master of a ship to be a person to whom the
charge of the entire ship is committed.

\(2) But if the contract is made with one of the sailors, an action will
not be granted against the ship-owner; although one will be granted
against him on account of any offence perpetrated by one of those who
are on board the vessel for the purpose of navigating the same; for the
cause of action on a contract is one thing, and that arising out of an
offence is another; since the party who appoints a master permits
contracts to be made with him, but he who employs sailors does not allow
contracts to be made with them, but he should take care that they are
not guilty of negligence or fraud.

\(3) Masters are appointed for the purpose of leasing vessels either for
the transportation of merchandise or of passengers, or for the purpose
of buying stores, but if a master is appointed for the purchase or sale
of merchandise, he will render the owner liable also on this ground.

\(4) It makes no difference what the civil condition of such a master
is, whether he is free or a slave, and whether, if he is a slave, he
belongs to the owner or to another person, nor will it make any
difference what his age is, as the party who appointed him has himself
only to blame.

\(5) We consider the master to be not only the person whom the owner
appointed, but also him whom a master appointed; and Julianus, having
been consulted with reference to this matter, gave this opinion in a
case where the owner was ignorant of the appointment; where, however, he
knows of it, and allows the individual designated to discharge the
duties of the master of the ship, he himself is held to have appointed
him. This opinion seems to me to be reasonable; for he who appointed him
must be responsible for all the acts of the master, otherwise, the
contracting parties will be deceived; and this should be admitted the
more readily for the sake of the public welfare in the case of a master
than in that of another agent. How then if the owner appointed the
master in such a way that the latter would not be permitted to appoint
anyone else; should it be considered whether we ought to admit the
opinion of Julianus in this instance? For suppose he expressly forbade
him as follows, "You shall not employ Titius as master." It must be
said, however, that the welfare of those who make use of ships demands
that the rule should be applied to this extent.

\(6) We must understand the word "ship" to mean vessels and even rafts,
employed for navigating the sea, rivers, or lakes.

\(7) The Prætor does not grant a right of action against an owner for
every cause, but only with reference to the particular thing for which
the master was appointed; that is to say, if he was appointed for a
certain kind of business, for instance, where a contract was made for
the transportation of merchandise; or where an agreement was entered
into or money expended for the purpose of repairing the ship; or where
the sailors demand payment on account of their services.

\(8) What if the master should borrow a sum of money, will this be held
to be included in his powers? Pegasus thinks that if he borrowed the
money with reference to the matter for which he was appointed, an action
should be granted, and this opinion I think to be correct; but what if
he borrowed it for the purpose of equipping or fitting out the ship, or
for the employment of sailors?

\(9) Wherefore, Ofilius asked if the master borrows the money for the
purpose of repairing the ship, and converts it to his own use, will an
action be granted against the owner? He says that if he received it with
the understanding that he would expend it on the ship, and afterwards
changed his mind, the owner will be liable, and can only blame himself
for appointing a person of this kind. If, however, from the very
beginning, he had the intention to defraud the creditor, and did not
expressly state that he received the money on account of the ship, the
contrary rule will apply. Pedius approves of this distinction.

\(10) Where, however, the master is guilty of deceit with reference to
the price of things which are purchased, the owner, and not the
creditor, must suffer the loss.

\(11) Moreover, where the master borrows money from another party, and
with it satisfies the claim of him who lent him money for the purpose of
repairing the ship; I think an action should be granted to the
first-mentioned creditor, just as if he had lent the money to be
expended on the ship.

\(12) Therefore, the appointment prescribes certain terms to be observed
by the contracting parties; and hence if the owner appointed the master
of the ship only for the purpose of collecting the freight, and not that
he might lease the ship, (although he may have actually leased it) the
owner will not be liable if the master did this; and the same rule will
apply where it was understood that he could only lease the ship but
could not collect the freight; or if he was appointed for the purpose of
contracting with passengers but not to offer the use of the ship for
merchandise, or *vice versa;* then, if he exceeds his instructions, he
will not bind the owner.

But if the master was appointed only to lease the ship for the
transportation of certain merchandise, for instance, vegetables, or
hemp, and he should lease it to transport marble or other materials, it
must be held that he will not be bound. For certain ships are designed
for freight and others (as is generally stated) are for the
transportation of passengers, and I know that a great many owners give
directions not to transport passengers, and also that business must be
transacted only in certain regions and in certain waters; for example,
there are ships which carry passengers to Brundisium from Cassiopa or
from Dyrrachium, but are not adapted for freight, and some also are
adapted to river navigation, but are not suitable for the sea.

\(13) Where several masters are appointed, and their duties are not
divided, any transaction entered into with one of them will bind the
owner; but if their separate duties are designated, as, for instance,
one has charge of leasing the vessel, and another is to collect freight,
then the owner will be bound by the acts of any one of them provided he
is in the discharge of his duty.

\(14) If, however, the party made the appointment, as is often done, in
such a way that one of them is not to transact any business without the
other, he who contracts with one alone will only have himself to blame.

\(15) When we make use of the word "*exercitor,*" we understand by it
the party into whose hands all receipts and payments come, whether he is
the owner of the ship, or whether he has leased it from the owner for a
fixed amount for a certain time, or permanently.

\(16) It makes but little difference whether the party who has control
of the ship is a man or a woman, the head of a household, a son under
paternal control, or a slave; but for a ward to have control of a ship
we require the consent of his guardian to be granted.

\(17) We have also the choice whether we would prefer to sue the person
having control of the ship, or the master of the same.

\(18) But, on the other hand, an action is not promised by the Prætor
against those who contracted with the master, because he did not need
the same assistance; he can, however, sue the master on the contract of
hiring, if he is furnishing his labor for compensation; or, if he is
doing this gratuitously, he can bring an action of mandate against him.

It is clear that the prefects, on account of the administration of
supplies, and, in the province, the governors, who are accustomed to aid
them by the exertion of extraordinary powers, can do so where contracts
are made by the masters of vessels.

\(19) If the party who has control of a ship is in the power of another,
and manages the vessel with his consent, an action will be granted on
account of business transacted with the master, against the party in
whose power he is who has the management of the ship.

\(20) But although an action is granted against the person under whose
control he is who has the management of a ship, still, this is only done
where he acts with the consent of the latter. Therefore, those who have
control of the party having the management are liable for the entire
amount, on account of their consent; because the ownership of vessels is
a matter of the greatest importance to the public welfare.

The employment of agents is not so advantageous, for the reason that
they who have transacted business, with a knowledge of the owner, using
capital belonging to the *peculium*, only have a right to their share in
the distribution of the same. But if the owner was only aware of the
fact, and did not give his consent when the contract was made with the
master, shall we grant a right of action for the entire amount, as in
the case where the party consented; or shall we only give one resembling
the tributorian action? Therefore, the question being doubtful, it is
better to adhere strictly to the words of the Edict, and not make the
mere knowledge of the father or master in the case of ships an excuse
for oppression, nor, in the case of merchandise purchased with the money
of the *peculium*, extend mere consent so as to cause an obligation to
be contracted for the entire amount.

Pomponius also seems to indicate adherence to the principle that where
one person is under the control of another and carries on business with
his consent, he will be liable for the entire amount, but if he does
not, that he will only be liable for the amount of the *peculium.*

\(21) We must understand the term "under the control" to apply to both
sexes, sons and daughters, and male and female slaves.

\(22) Where a slave, who is part of a *peculium*, acts as the manager of
a ship with the consent of a son under paternal control of whose
*peculium* he forms a part, or where, a sub-slave manages a ship with
the consent of the latter, the father or master who did not give his
consent will only be liable for the amount of the *peculium*, but the
son himself will be liable in full. It is clear if they manage the ship
with the consent of the master or father, they will be liable for the
entire amount, and, moreover, the son, if he gave his consent, will also
be liable in full.

\(23) But, although the Prætor only promises the action where the
business is transacted with the master of the ship, still, (as Julianus
has stated) the father or the master will be liable in full, even though
the contract was entered into with the manager of the ship himself.

\(24) This action is granted against the owner on account of the master
of the ship, and therefore if suit has been brought against either of
them, none can be brought against the other; but if any of the money has
been paid, and this has been done by the master, the obligation is
diminished by operation of law. If, however, it was paid by the manager
in his own behalf, that is on account of the honorary obligation, or is
paid in behalf of the master, the obligation is diminished; since where
another party pays for me he releases me from the debt.

\(25) Where several parties have joint-ownership of a vessel, suit can
be brought against any one of them for the entire amount;

\2. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

In order that a person who contracted with one may not be obliged to
divide his claim among several adversaries,

\3. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Nor does it make any difference what share each of them has in the
vessel, for the party who paid will recover from the others in the
action on partnership.

\4. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where, however, several persons have the management of a ship between
them, they must be sued in proportion to their shares in the same, for
they are not regarded as masters for one another.

\(1) Where several persons having the management of a ship appoint one
of their number to be the master, they can be sued on his account for
the entire claim.

\(2) Where a slave belonging to several persons manages a ship with
their consent, the same rule applies as where there are several
managers. For it is clear that if he acted with the consent of any one
of them, the latter will be liable for the entire amount; and therefore
I think that in the case above mentioned all of them are liable in full.

\(3) If a slave who had control of a ship with the consent of his owner
should be alienated, the party who alienated him will, nevertheless, be
liable. Hence he would also be liable if the slave should die, for the
owner of the ship will be liable after the death of the master.

\(4) These actions are granted without limitation of time both in the
favor of heirs, and against them. Hence, if a slave who has control of a
ship with the consent of his master should die, this action will be
granted after the expiration of a year, although an action *De peculio*
is not granted after a year has elapsed.

\5. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

If you have, as the master of your ship, someone who is under my
control, an action will also lie in my favor against you if I enter into

any contract with him. The same rule applies where he is owned in common
by us. You will, however, be entitled to an action on lease against me,
because you hired the services of my slave, as, even if he had
contracted with another, you could proceed against me to obtain a
transfer of the rights of action which I held on his account, just as
you could have done against a freedman had you employed one; but if the
services were gratuitous, you can bring an action on mandate.

\(1) Moreover, if my slave has control of a ship, and I make a contract
with his shipmaster, there will be nothing to prevent me from
instituting proceedings against the shipmaster by an action which I can
bring either under civil or prætorian law; for this edict does not
prevent anyone from suing the master, as no action is transferred by
this edict, but one is added.

\(2) Where one of the owners of a ship makes a contract with the master,
he can bring an action against the others.

\6. *Paulus, Abridgments, Book VI.*

Where a slave has control of a ship without the consent of his master,
if he is aware of this, a tributorian action will be granted; but if he
is ignorant of the fact, an action *De peculio* will be available. Where
a slave owned in common has control of a ship with the consent of his
masters, an action for the entire amount will be granted against them
individually.

\7. *Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.*

Lucius Titius appointed Stichus the master of a ship, and he, having
borrowed money, stated that he received it for the purpose of repairing
the ship. The question arose whether Titius was liable to an action on
this ground only where the creditor proved that the money had been
expended for the repair of the ship? The answer was that the creditor
could properly bring an action if, when the money was lent, the ship was
in such a condition as to need repairs; for, while the creditor should
not be compelled to, himself, undertake the repair of the ship, and
transact the business of the owner (which would certainly be the case if
he was required to show that the money had been spent for repairs);
still, it should be required of him that he know that he makes the loan
for the purpose for which the master was appointed; and this certainly
could not happen unless he also knew that the money was needed for
repairs. Wherefore, even though the ship was in such a condition as to
need repairs, still, if much more money was lent than was necessary for
that purpose, an action for the entire amount should not be granted
against the owner of the ship.^1^

^1^ These provisions were adopted practically by all the maritime codes
of modern times. "If a Master shall take up Monies to mend or victual
his Ship where there is no occasion, (though generally the Owners shall
answer the fact of the Master) yet here they shall not, but only the
Master. But if there were cause of mending the Ship, though the Master
spends the Money another way, yet the Owners and Ship become liable to
the satisfaction of the Creditor; for it were very unreasonable that the
Creditor should be bound to take upon him the care of repairing the
Ship, and supply the Owner's room, which must be so, if it should be

\(1) Sometimes it should be considered whether the money was lent in a
place in which that for which it was advanced could be obtained; for, as
Africanus says, what would be the case if someone lent money for the
purchase of a sail in an island of such a description that a sail could
not be obtained there under any circumstances? And, in general, a
creditor is obliged to exercise some care in the transaction.

necessary for him, that the Money be paid out upon the Ship; so on the
other hand, it stands with reason that he be sure that he lends his
Money on such an occasion, as whereby the Masters fact may oblige the
Owners, which he cannot do otherwise, unless he knows that the Money
borrowed was necessary for the repair of the Ship; and therefore if the
Ship wanted some repairs, and a far greater and more extravagant sum was
lent than was needed, the Owners shall not be liable for the whole."
(Justice, A General Treatise of the Dominion and Laws of the Sea III,
II, Page 443.)

At Common Law, the owners of ships and persons employed by them were,
generally speaking, subject to the rules governing common carriers, and
were liable for all loss or damage sustained by the property while in
their charge, except such as was occasioned by the act of God or public
enemies; unless provisions expressly designed to diminish their
responsibility were inserted into the contract. This, as well as many
other regulations which have come down from antiquity, has been
confirmed or only slightly modified by statute in both England and the
United States. Liability for injury to, or destruction of property now
only attaches to the shipowner where he was evidently to blame for its
occurrence, or where he had joint knowledge of the act, with implied
consent. An exception is also made in his favor in case of the theft of
any jewels or other precious articles, where their nature and value have
not been distinctly specified in writing at the time they were delivered
for transportation.

The master of the vessel, who is presumed to have the goods under his
immediate supervision, is, on his part, held to even more strict
accountability than the owner. He is exempt from liability when damage
results from the negligence of the pilot. He is authorized to
hypothecate or sell a portion of the cargo when this expedient must be
adopted to save the remainder, or to obtain funds for repairs which are
absolutely necessary. (Smith, Compendium of Mercantile Law, III, 3.)

In the United States, in fixing the liability for supplies furnished and
repairs made, the main question to be determined is, upon whose account
were these things done. The responsibility depends, not on the general
ownership of the vessel, but on who had control, or legal possession of
it during the voyage, that is, the principal party in interest, who may
be considered either as the permanent or the temporary proprietor. The
part-owners of a ship are held to be tenants in common, and not
partners, each being entitled to an individual interest, and one cannot
dispose of that of any of the others. A partnership in a vessel may,
however, exist, if the requisite formalities are observed; and it then
becomes subject to the rules prescribed by this branch of the law. The
authority of a part-owner is vastly enlarged in case of urgent necessity
which may involve the loss of, or serious damage to the ship or cargo,
if preventive or remedial measures are not promptly taken; and, under
such circumstances, in conformity with the implied legal presumption
that the others desire their property to be saved or taken care of, a
single part-owner may act for his associates, and bind them for the
expenses and purchases required.

The principle of tenancy in common extends not only to the ship but also
to the cargo, unless otherwise provided for; the master, being regarded
as the confidential agent of the owners, is held to be tacitly invested
with authority to bind them without their consent in all matters having
reference to the general management and navigation of the ship; a rule
of unknown antiquity, but which is obviously derived from the earliest
ages of commercial intercourse. He is personally liable for his
contracts, from which responsibility, however, he may obtain exemption
by special agreement. As in the case of a part-owner, he can sell or
hypothecate all, or a portion of the cargo, as well as the ship, if any
sudden

\(2) Almost the same rule applies where inquiry is made with reference
to the institorian action; for, in this instance also, the creditor must
know that the purchase of the merchandise for which the slave was
appointed was necessary; and it will be sufficient if he made the loan
to this end, but it should not also be required that he should himself
undertake the task of ascertaining whether the money was spent for this
purpose.

TITLE II. CONCERNING THE RHODIAN LAW OF JETTISON.

\1. *Paulus, Sentences, Book II.*

It is provided by the Rhodian Law that where merchandise is thrown
overboard for the purpose of lightening a ship, what has been lost for
the benefit of all must be made up by the contribution of all.

\2. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.*

When anything has been thrown overboard on account of the distress of a
ship, the owners of the lost merchandise must sue the master of the ship
on the contract for transportation, if they had entered into an
agreement for the carriage of the same; and he can then bring suit

exigency should demand that this be done; but the necessity for such a
step must be unquestionable. (Kent, Commentaries on American Law, Vol.
III, V, XLIII.)

The maritime jurisprudence of the Latin countries of Europe is more
indulgent to part-owners, in the matter of necessary expenditures for
the benefit of the vessel and her cargo, than that of England and
America; as they are held accountable only to the extent of their
individual shares, and not in full as partners; the ownership in the
enterprise being considered that of a joint-stock company whose acts are
controlled by the vote of the majority. "Si *dos ó mas personas fueren
participes en la propriedád de un buque mercante, se presumirá
constituida una Campañia por los coproprietarios.*

"*Esta Compañia se regirá par los-acuerdos de la mayoria de sus socios.
Los coproprietarios de un buque serán civilmente responsables en la
proporción de su haber social." (Codigo de Comercio de España*, Arts.
589, 590.)

The Italian Code of Commerce, like others, makes the owner responsible
for the acts of the captain and crew, as well as for all contracts which
have reference to the ship and the transportation of the cargo. Where
there are several proprietors, the rights of the management and
disposition of the vessel are vested in those who have a controlling
interest in its ownership.

The captain cannot sell the ship without the special order of the owner
to that effect, except where it becomes worthless for purposes of
navigation.

"*I proprietarii di navi sono responsabili dei fatti del eapitano e
delle altre persone dell' equipaggio, e sono tenuti per le obbligazioni
contratte del capitano, per ciò che concerne la nave e la spedizione.*

"*Per tutto ciò che riguarda l'interesse comune dei proprietarii di una
nave, le deliberazioni della maggioranza sono obligatorie per la
minoranza.*

"*La maggioranza si determina da una porzione di interesse nella nave
eccedente*

*la metà dei suo valore.*

"*Il capitano non puo vendere la nave senza mandato speciale del
proprietario, eccettuato il caso d'inabilita alla navigazione." (Codice
di Commercio pel Regno*

*d'ltalia*, Arts. 491, 495, 513.)

The French regulations concerning the liability of the owner and captain
are

substantially the same.  ED.

against the others whose merchandise was saved, so that the loss may be
distributed proportionally. Servius, indeed, answered that they should
proceed against the master of the ship under the contract for
transportation to compel him to return the merchandise of the others,
until they make good their share of the loss. Even though the master
does retain the merchandise, he will, in any event, be entitled to an
action under the contract for transportation against the passengers.

What is to be done if there are passengers who have no baggage? It
evidently will be more convenient to retain their baggage, if there is
any; but if there is not, and the party has leased the entire ship, an
action can be brought on the contract, just as in the case of passengers
who have rented places on a ship; for it is perfectly just that the loss
should be partially borne by those who, by the destruction of the
property of others, have secured the preservation of their own
merchandise.

\(1) If the merchandise is saved, and the ship is damaged, or has lost
part of her equipment, no contribution should be made, for the condition
of the things provided for the use of the ship is different from that on
account of which the freight has been received; since, if a blacksmith
breaks an anvil or a hammer, this will not be charged to him who hired
him to do the work. Where, however, the loss occurred with the consent
of the passengers, or on account of their fear, it must be made good.

\(2) Where several merchants collect different kinds of goods in the
same ship, and, in addition, many passengers, both slaves and freemen,
are travelling in it, and a great storm arises, and part of the cargo is
necessarily thrown overboard; the question was with respect to the
following point, namely, whether it was necessary for all to make good
what was thrown overboard; and whether this must also be done by those
who had brought on board such merchandise as did not burden the ship;
as, for instance, precious stones and pearls, and if this was the case,
what portion of the same must be contributed; and whether it was
necessary for anything to be paid for freemen, and by what kind of an
action proceedings could be instituted? It was held that all those to
whose interest it was that the goods should be thrown overboard must
contribute, because they owed that contribution on account of the
preservation of their property, and therefore even the owner of the ship
was liable for his share. The amount of the loss must be distributed in
proportion to the value of the property; no appraisement can be made of
the persons of freemen; and the owners of the lost property have a right
to proceed on the contract for transportation against the sailor, that
is the master. An agreement also arose as to whether an estimate was to
be made of the clothing and rings of each person, and it was held that
this should be done, and that everything should be taken into account
for contribution, except what had been brought on board for the purpose
of consumption, in which would be included all kinds of provisions; and
there is all the more reason in this, for if, at any time during the
voyage, such articles should be lacking, each one would contribute what
he possessed to the common stock.

\(3) If the ship has been ransomed from pirates Servius, Ofilius, and
Labeo state that all should contribute; but with reference to what the
robbers carried away, the loss must be borne by the party to whom it
belonged, and no contribution should be made to him who ransomed

his property.

\(4) The share is generally contributed in accordance with the valuation
of the property which is saved, and of that which is lost; and it makes
no difference if that which was lost might have been sold for a higher
price, since the contribution relates to loss and not to profit. With
reference, however, to those things on account of which contribution
must be made, the estimate should be based upon not what they had been
purchased for, but upon what they could be sold

for.

\(5) No estimate should be made of slaves who are lost at sea, any more
than where those who are ill die on the ship, or throw themselves

overboard.

\(6) If any of the passengers should be insolvent, the loss resulting
from this will not be suffered by the master of the vessel; for a sailor
is not obliged to inquire into the financial resources of everybody.

\(7) Where property which has been thrown overboard is recovered, the
necessity for contribution is at an end; but if it has already been
made, then those who had paid can bring an action on the contract for
transportation against the master, and he can proceed under the one for
hiring, and return what he recovers.

\(8) Any articles thrown overboard belong to the owner of the same, and
do not become the property of him who obtains them, because they are not
considered as abandoned.

\3. *Papinianus, Opinions, Book XIX.*

Where a mast, or any other part of the equipment of a ship is thrown
overboard for the purpose of removing a danger common to all,
contribution is required.

\4. *Callistratus, Questions, Book II.*

If, for the purpose of lightening an overloaded ship because she could
not enter a river or reach a harbor with her cargo, a certain portion of
the merchandise is placed in a boat to prevent the vessel from being in
danger outside the river, or at the entrance of the harbor, or in the
latter, and the boat is sunk, an account should be taken between those
who have their merchandise preserved on the ship and those who lost
theirs in the boat, just as if the latter had been thrown overboard.
Sabinus also adopts this view in the Second Book of Opinions. On the
other hand, if the boat is saved with part of the merchandise, and the
ship is lost, no account should be taken with reference to those who
lost their property in the ship, because jettison necessitates
contribution only where the ship is saved.

\(1) But where a ship, which has been lightened in a storm by throwing
overboard the goods of a merchant, is sunk in some other place, and the
goods of certain merchants are recovered by divers for

compensation; Sabinus also says an account must be taken between the
party whose goods were thrown overboard during the voyage for the
purpose of lightening the ship, and those who subsequently recovered
their goods by means of divers. But, on the other hand, no account must
be presented by the party whose merchandise was thrown overboard during
the voyage to those whose merchandise was not thereby preserved, if any
of it was recovered by divers; for it cannot be held to have been thrown
overboard for the purpose of saving the ship which was lost.

\(2) But where jetsam is made from the ship, and the merchandise of
anyone which remained on board, is damaged; it is a matter for
consideration whether he should be compelled to contribute, since he
ought not to be oppressed by the double loss of contribution and
deterioration of his property. The point, however, may be maintained
that he should contribute in proportion to the present value of his
property. Thus, for example, where the merchandise of two persons was
each worth twenty *aurei*, and that of one of them became only worth
ten, on account of having been wet; the party whose property was not
damaged should contribute in the proportion of twenty and the other in
the proportion of ten.

An opinion can, however, be given in this instance, if we make a
distinction as to the cause of the deterioration; that is to say,
whether the damage resulted on account of the exposure resulting from
throwing the merchandise overboard, or for some other cause; for
example, where the merchandise lay somewhere in a corner, and the waves
reached it. In this instance the owner will be compelled to contribute,
but in the former one, ought he not to be released from the burden of
contribution because the jetsam also injured him? Or ought he to be
liable even if his goods were deteriorated by the splashing of water on
account of the jetsam?

A still finer distinction should be made, namely, as to whether the
greater loss is sustained through the damage, or through the
contribution; for example, if the merchandise is worth twenty *aurei*,
and the contribution is assessed at ten, the damage, however, amounts to
two, and this having been deducted because of the loss, must the owner
contribute the remainder? How then if the damage amounted to more than
the contribution? For example, if the property was damaged to the amount
of ten *aurei*, and the contribution amounted to two, there is no doubt
that the party should not bear both burdens. But here let us see whether
a contribution should not be made to him; for what difference does it
make whether I lose my property by its being thrown overboard, or have
it deteriorated by being exposed? For just as relief is granted to a
party for the loss of his property, so, also, it should be granted to
him whose property has become deteriorated on account of the jetsam.
Papirius Fronto also stated this in an opinion.

\5. *Hermogeniamis, Epitomes of Law, Book II.*

The contribution of those who saved their merchandise from shipwreck
does not indemnify anyone for the loss of the vessel; for it is

held that the equity of this contribution is only admitted when, by the
remedy of jetsam, during the common danger, the interest of the others
is consulted, and the ship is saved.

\(1) If the mast is cut away in order that the ship with its merchandise
may be freed from danger, there will be an equitable claim for
contribution.

\6. *Julianus, Digest, Book LXXXVI.*

*A* ship beaten by a storm and with her rigging, mast, and yards burned
by lightning, was carried into Hippo. Having been provided while there
with a hasty and temporary equipment, she sailed for Ostia, and
discharged her cargo uninjured. The question was asked whether those to
whom the cargo belonged were obliged to contribute to the master of the
ship in proportion to the loss? The answer was that they were not
obliged to do so, as the expense was incurred rather for the purpose of
equipping the ship, than to preserve the cargo.

\7. *Paulus, Epitomes of the Digest of Alfenus, Book III.*

Where a ship is sunk or stranded, the opinion was given that whatever
each one saves out of his own property he can keep for himself, just as
in case of fire.

\8. *Julianus, On Minicius, Book II.*

Those who throw any property overboard for the purpose of lightening a
ship, do not intend to consider it as abandoned; since if they should
find it they can carry it away, and if they have any idea of the place
where it has been cast by the sea, they can claim it; so that they are
in the same condition as anyone who oppressed by a burden throws it down
on the road, expecting to return presently with others and remove it.

\9. *Volusius Mæcianus, On the Rhodian Law.*

A petition of Eudaimon of Nicomedia to the Emperor Antoninus; "Lord
Emperor Antoninus, having been shipwrecked in Icaria we have been robbed
by farmers of the revenue inhabiting the Cyclades Islands." Antoninus
answered Eudaimon as follows: "I am, indeed, the Lord of the World, but
the Law is the Lord of the sea; and this affair must be decided by the
Rhodian law adopted with reference to maritime questions, provided no
enactment of ours is opposed to it." The Divine Augustus established the
same rule.

\10. *Labeo, Epitomes of the Probabilities of Paulus, Book I.*

If you have made a contract for the transportation of slaves, freight is
not due to you for a slave who died on the ship. Paulus says that, in
fact, the question is what was agreed upon, whether freight was to be
paid for those who were loaded on the ship, or only for those who were
carried to their destination? And if this cannot be established, it will
be enough for the master of the ship to prove that the slave was placed
on board.

\(1) If you hired a ship on condition that your merchandise was to be
transported by her, and the master of the ship, without being compelled
by necessity, placed your property on an inferior vessel, being aware
that you did not wish this to be done; and your merchandise was lost,
together with the ship in which it was last transported, you will be
entitled to an action on the contract of leasing and hiring against the
master of the first ship.

Paulus, on the other hand, says that this is not true, provided both
ships were lost on the voyage, since it occurred without the malice or
negligence of the sailors. The rule is the same if the first master,
having been detained by public authority, was prevented from sailing
with your merchandise. This rule is also applicable if he entered into a
contract with you under the condition that he would pay you a certain
penalty if he did not, by a day agreed upon, land your goods in a place
to which he had agreed to transport them, and he was not to blame if he
did not wait; even though the penalty was remitted to him. We must
observe the same rule in a similar imaginary case, where it is proved
that the master, having been prevented by illness, was unable to sail,
if his ship became unfit for navigation without any malicious intent or
negligence of his.

\(2) If you hire a ship capable of transporting two thousand jars and
place jars on board, you are liable for the freight of two thousand
jars. Paulus says that the fact is, if you hire the entire capacity of
the ship, the freight for two thousand jars will be due, but if the
freight was agreed upon according to the number of jars placed on board,
the contrary rule will apply; for you owe for the transportation of as
many jars as you placed on board.

TITLE III. CONCERNING THE INSTITORIAN ACTION.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

It appeared just to the Prætor that, as we obtain advantages from the
acts of agents, so also we should be bound by, and liable to be sued on,
contracts made by them. He does not, however, provide the same with
reference to the party who is appointed an agent, so that he also may
institute proceedings. When, indeed, he employs his own slave as agent,
he can be secure, as the rights of action are acquired for him; if,
however, he employs either the slave of another or some freeman, he will
not be entitled to an action, but he can sue the agent himself or his
master, either on the ground of mandate, or on that of business
transacted. Marcellus, however, says that an action should be granted to
the party who appointed the agent against those who have made contracts
with him,

\2. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

In the same form in which the agent made the contract, provided he
cannot protect himself in any other way.

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

An agent is so called because he interposes in the transaction of
business, and does it make much difference whether he is appointed to
conduct a shop, or to engage in any other kind of employment:

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

As they sometimes take goods to the houses of honorable persons, and
sell them there. The place where the property is sold or purchased does
not change the cause of action, since in each instance it is true that
the agent has bought or sold.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

Therefore, no matter what business he has been appointed to transact he
will be properly styled an agent.

\(1) For Servius also, in the first book on Brutus, says that where any
business is transacted with a person who has charge of a house, or with
some one who has been appointed to superintend the building or to buy
grain, he will be liable for the entire amount.

\(2) Labeo also stated that where anyone has appointed a person to lend
money at interest, to cultivate land, to engage in commerce, or to make
contracts, he is liable in full.

\(3) Moreover, where anyone has appointed his slave to have charge of a
broker's table, he will be liable on his account.

\(4) It is also settled that those who are appointed by clothing
merchants or weavers of linen to go about for the sale of clothing, whom
we ordinarily call *circitores*, should also be designated as agents.

\(5) Anyone may also properly call muleteers agents,

 (6) As well as those who are appointed by fullers and tailors.
Stable-keepers should likewise be considered as occupying the place as

agents.

\(7) Labeo also says that if a shop-keeper despatches his slave to a
distance for the purpose of purchasing merchandise and sending it to
him, he must be considered to occupy the place of an agent.

\(8) He also says that, if an undertaker has a slave whose duty it is to
prepare corpses for burial, and he robs a corpse; a proceeding similar
to the Institorian Action should be granted against him, although the
suit for theft and that for injury will both lie.

\(9) Labeo also says that, where a baker was accustomed to send his
slave to a certain place for the purpose of selling bread, and he,
having accepted money to deliver bread to certain parties every day,
neglected to do so; there is no doubt that the baker will be liable, if
he permitted the money to be given to him in this manner.

\(10) Where a fuller, being about to start on a long journey, requested
that directions should be given to his apprentices, to whom he had
delivered his shop thoroughly equipped; and, after his departure, an
apprentice had received clothing and taken to flight; the fuller will
not be liable if the slave was left as an ordinary agent, but if this
was done in a way to make him the manager of the business he would be
liable. It is evident that if he stated to me that I might trust his

workmen, he will not be liable to an Institorian Action, but to one on a
contract for hiring.

\(11) It is not, however, everything which is transacted with the
business-agent which will bind the party who appointed him, but only
where the contract was made with respect to the matter on account of
which he was appointed, that is to say, only that for which he was
appointed.

\(12) Hence, if I appoint anyone to sell merchandise, I shall be liable
on his account to the action on purchase; and likewise, if I should
happen to have appointed him for the purchase of merchandise, I shall be
liable to the action on sale; but a party will not be bound if the
appointment was made to purchase and he sells, nor if he was appointed
to sell and he purchases; and this opinion is approved by Cassius.

\(13) But where anyone lends money to a business-agent appointed to
purchase merchandise, there is ground for the Institorian Action, and,
in like manner, if he was appointed to pay the rent for the shop; and I
think that this is true unless he was forbidden to borrow.

\(14) Where, however, a loan of oil is made to a party whom I have
appointed to buy and sell oil, it must be said that the Institorian
Action will lie.

\(15) Likewise, if an agent, when he sold oil, received a ring as
earnest, and does not return it, his master is liable to an Institorian
Action; for the contract relates to the business which he was appointed
to transact, unless he should have been directed to make sales for cash.
Wherefore, if the agent should have accepted a pledge instead of money,
an Institorian Action will lie.

\(16) Moreover, the Institorian Action can be brought by a surety who
had interposed in behalf of the agent, for this is a result of the
transaction.

\(17) If an agent has been appointed by anyone, and he who appointed him
should die, leaving an heir who employs the same agent; there is no
doubt that he will be liable. Again, if a contract was made with him
before the estate was entered upon, it is but just that the Institorian
Action should be granted to one who is ignorant of the facts.

\(18) If, however, my agent, guardian, or curator, should appoint a
business manager, it must be said that an Institorian Action ought to be
granted, just as if he had been appointed by me.

\6. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

The Institorian Action should also be granted against the agent himself,
if he was one appointed for the transaction of all kinds of business.

\7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

Moreover, if anyone who is transacting my business makes an appointment,
and I ratify it, the same rule will apply.

\(1) It makes little difference who the business-agent may be, whether
male or female, freeman or slave, your own slave, or that of

another. It is also of no consequence who appointed him; for if a woman
made the appointment, the Institorian Action will lie, just as the
Exercitorian Action against the party having control of a ship; and if a
woman is appointed, she herself will be liable. Again, if a woman under
parental control, or a female slave is appointed, the Institorian Action
can be brought.

\(2) When the business-agent is a minor, he will bind the person who
appointed him by the Institorian Action, as he must blame himself for
appointing him.

\8. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

For many persons appoint boys and girls for the management of shops.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

But where a minor himself makes the appointment, he will be liable if
this was done with the consent of his guardian, otherwise not.

\10. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

An action will, nevertheless, be granted against him to the extent that
he has pecuniarily profited by the transaction.

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

Where, however, a minor becomes heir to the party who made the
appointment, it is perfectly just that the minor should be liable so
long as he retains his appointment; for he ought to have been removed by
his guardians if they were unwilling to make use of his services.

\(1) But if he who made the appointment was under twenty-five years of
age, he can only claim relief on account of his age after proper
investigation has been made.

\(2) A party is not deemed to occupy the position of one appointed to
take charge of a business, if notice has been publicly given that no
contracts shall be made with him, for it should not be permitted to
transact business with him as an agent, and anyone who does not wish
contracts to be made with him may prohibit it; but the party who
appointed him will be bound by the appointment itself.

\(3) To give public notice we understand to mean that it shall be made
in plain letters, so as to be easily read from the ground; that is to
say, in front of the shop or place where the business is carried on, not
in a retired place, but in one which is conspicuous. Shall the notice be
in Greek or in Latin letters? I am of the opinion that this depends upon
the character of the place, so that no one can plead ignorance of the
letters. It is certain that if anyone alleges that he is unable to read,
or did not observe the notice, as many persons can read, and the notice
was conspicuously posted, he will not be heard.

\(4) It is essential that the notice should be permanently posted; for
if the contract was made before the notice was set up, or it was
concealed, the Institorian Action will be available. Hence, if the owner
of merchandise posted *a* notice, but someone removed it, or through
age,

rain, or something of this kind, the result was that there was no
notice, or it did not appear; it must be said that the party who made
the appointment will be liable. If, however, the agent himself removed
it for the purpose of deceiving me, his malicious act should prejudice
the party who appointed him, unless he who made the contract also
participated in the fraud.

\(5) Any condition upon which the appointment depended must also be
considered, for what must be done if the party desired business to be
transacted with him under a certain condition, or through the
intervention of a certain person, or under a pledge, or with reference
to a certain matter? It is perfectly just that whatever the party was
appointed for should be taken into account. Likewise, where the
principal has several agents, and desired contracts to be made with all
of them at once, or with one alone; and if he warned anyone not to
contract with him, he should not be liable to the Institorian Action,
for we can forbid either a certain person or a certain class of men or
merchants from making a contract, or we can permit certain persons to do
so. But where the principal has forbidden a contract to be made,
sometimes with one man and sometimes with another, the changes being
continual, the action should be granted to all of them against him, as
parties who make contracts should not be deceived.

\(6) Where the principal absolutely prohibited any contract to be made
with him, he is not considered to occupy the position of an agent
appointed for business purposes, since he is rather occupying the
position of a custodian than of an agent, and therefore he cannot sell
merchandise, not even the most paltry article, out of the shop.

\(7) Where the Institorian Action has been properly brought, the
Tributorian Action is excluded by operation of law, for the Tributorian
Action with reference to the merchandise of the owner will not be
available. If, however, the party was not the business-agent for the
owner's goods, the Tributorian Action will survive.

\(8) Where I hire from your slave the services of his slave, and make
him the business agent for my merchandise, and he sells you any goods,
this constitutes a purchase; for when a master buys from his slave it is
a purchase, even though the master may not be liable, to the extent that
the master can, as a purchaser, possess and acquire property by
usucaption.

\12. *Julianus, Digest, Book XI.*

Therefore an Institorian equitable action can be brought by you against
me; or, on the other hand, I can sue you either for the *peculium* of
the slave who is managing the business, and also on the contract for
hiring, if I desire to do so; or for the *peculium* of the sub-slave,
because I gave him directions to sell the goods, and the price at which
you made the purchase may be held as having reference to your affairs
for the reason that you became a debtor to your own slave.

\13. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

*A* certain man appointed a slave for the management of an oil business
at Aries, and authorized the said slave to borrow money, and he

did so. The creditor, supposing the money had been borrowed on account
of the business, brought the action of which we are treating, but was
unable to prove that the slave had received it for that purpose.
Although the right of action is extinguished, and he could not proceed
further as being authorized to obtain loans of money, still, Julianus
says that an equitable action will lie in his favor.

\(1) It is important to remember that the master is only liable to the
Institorian Action where no one renews the obligation, whether this be
done by the agent or by some other party who stipulates with the
intention of renewing it.

\(2) Where two or more persons are conducting a shop, and they appoint
as business-agent a slave whom they own in unequal shares, Julianus asks
whether they are liable in proportion to their shares in the slave, or
equally, or in proportion to their shares in the merchandise, or indeed,
for the entire amount? He says that the better opinion would seem to be,
as in the case of parties who have control of a ship, as well as the
action *De peculio, *that any of them can be sued for the entire
indebtedness, and that whatever he who is sued has paid, he can recover
by the action on partnership, or by that for the partition of property
held in common. This opinion we have also approved above.

\14. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book IV.*

The same rule will apply if a slave belonging to another has been
appointed to manage a business owned in common; for an action for the
entire amount should be granted against either of the owners, and what
either of them has paid he can recover a share of, either by the action
on partnership, or by that for the partition of property held in common.
It is certain that, wherever the action on partnership or that for the
division of common property does not lie, it is established that each
party can only have judgment rendered against him for his share; as, for
example, where one to whose slave money was lent, having appointed two
heirs, gave the slave his freedom; for each heir can only be sued for
his share, because the action for the division of property held in
common cannot be brought between them.

\15. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

In conclusion, it should be remembered that these actions are granted
without reference to time, and both in favor of and against heirs.

\16. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where a contract is made with the steward of anyone, an action is not
granted against his master, for the reason that a steward is appointed
for the collection of revenue, and not for profit. If, however, I have a
steward who is also appointed for the sale of merchandise, it is not
unjust that I should be liable to an action similar to the institorian
one.

\17. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where anyone is appointed for the purpose of purchasing and selling
slaves, beasts of burden, or cattle, not only the Institorian Action
will lie

against the party who appointed him, but also the action for rescission
of contract,^1^ as well as that on the stipulation for double or single
damages for the entire amount should be granted against him.

\(1) If you have the slave of Titius as your business-manager, I can
proceed against you under this Edict, or against Titius under the Edicts
hereinafter mentioned; but if you have forbidden any contracts to be
made with him, suit can only be brought against Titius.

\(2) Where a child under puberty becomes the heir of a father who had
business-agents, and then contracts are made with them; it must be held
that an action can be granted against the child for the sake of the
benefit of ordinary commerce; just as where, after the death of a
guardian with whose consent an agent has been appointed, business is
transacted with him.

\(3) Pomponius also stated that an action should certainly be granted on
account of a contract which was concluded before the estate was entered
upon, even though the heir should become insane; for he is not to blame
who, being aware that the principal is dead, contracts with the agent
managing the business.

\(4) Proculus says that if I notify you not to make a loan to a slave
appointed by me, the exception, "If he did not notify him not to lend to
that slave," may be granted. But if he has any property of his own, or
anything arising from the contract has been employed in my business, and
I am not willing to make payment to the amount to which I have been
pecuniarily benefited, a replication based on malicious intent should be
filed, for I must be held to be guilty of malicious intent through
attempting to profit by the loss of another.

\(5) It is true that a personal action for recovery will also be
available in this instance.

\18. *The Same, Various Passages.*

A business-agent is one who is appointed to take charge of a shop or a
place to purchase or sell, or one who is appointed for such a purpose
without any place being designated.

\19. *Papinianus, Opinions, Book III.*

A prætorian action will be granted, as in the case of an Institorian
Action, against a party who appointed an agent to borrow money; and this
also is the case where the agent, who promised money to a party entering
into a stipulation, is solvent.

^1^ The *Actio Redhibitoria* was available in the case of a sale where
the quality of the object disposed of was not what it was represented to
be, or what the purchaser had a right to believe that it was, under the
circumstances. The law presumed that an implied warranty was given by
the vendor against all concealed faults or blemishes in what was sold
that would, in any way, detract from its fitness for the service for
which it was destined, or impair its value. This rule applied
particularly to animals and slaves, in which secret defects might
readily exist without detection.

The *Actio Redhibitoria*, which was required to be brought within six
months after the transaction in question had taken place, absolutely
rescinded the contract, and placed the parties, as far as possible, in
the same condition, with respect to

\(1) Where a master had a slave as business-manager at a table for
receiving money, and after he had given him his freedom carried on the
same business by his freedman, the fact of responsibility will not be
removed by the change of civil condition.

\(2) Where a son who was appointed by his father to have charge of his
shop, borrowed money for the purpose of the business, and his father
became his surety; he can be proceeded against by means of the
Institorian Action, since, by becoming surety, he connected the act of
borrowing the money with the business of the shop.

\(3) A slave appointed solely for the purpose of lending money at
interest does not, in the capacity of business manager, render his
master liable in full, under Prætorian law, by assuming a debt as
surety; but so far as money which he promised to another (in
consideration of the substitution of liability) at interest is
concerned, an action can properly be brought against the master on the
ground of money lent to the party who made the substitution.

\20. *Scævola, Digest, Book V.*

Lucius Titius had a freedman appointed to take charge of a
money-broker's table, which he was conducting; and the said freedman
gave an obligation to Gaius Seius in these words: "Octavius Terminalis
transacting the business of Octavius Felix to Domitius Felis, Greeting.
You have a thousand *denarii* in the bank of my patron, which I shall be
bound to pay you the day before the *Kalends* of May." The question
arose whether Lucius Titius having died without an heir, and his
property having been sold, Terminalis could lawfully be sued on account
of this letter? The answer was that he was not legally bound by these
words, nor was there any ground of equity on which he could be sued; as
he wrote this in the performance of his duty as a business agent, for
the purpose of maintaining the credit of the bank.

TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE TRIBUTORIAN ACTION.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The advantage of this Edict is far from being of trifling importance, as
a master, who, otherwise, enjoys a privilege in the case of contracts
made by a slave (since he is liable only for the amount of the
*peculium*, the estimate of which is made after what is due to the
master has been deducted), is, nevertheless, called upon by this Edict
to contribute like any other creditor, if he was aware that the slave
was transacting business with property belonging to the *peculium.*

\(1) Although the term "merchandise" is one of limited signification,
and does not apply to slaves who are fullers, tailors, weavers, or

the sale, in which they were in the beginning. All profits and
accessions which may have accrued either to the purchase-money or the
article itself were required to be surrendered. Refusal on the part of
the vendor to return the money and everything he had gained by it,
involved the collection of double damages.  ED.

dealers in slaves, still, Pedius says in the Fifteenth Book that the
Edict must be held to embrace transactions of every description.

\(2) Merchandise of the *peculium* we do not understand to mean the same
as the *peculium* itself, for the latter is considered to indicate the
remainder after what has been due to the master has been deducted; but
merchandise of the *peculium* renders a master liable to the Tributorian
Action, even though there may be nothing whatever in the *peculium*,
only however, where the business is transacted with his knowledge.

\(3) In this instance we understand the word "knowledge" to signify that
which includes consent, but (as I think) not merely consent but
tolerance, for the master need not wish it, but he must not be
unwilling. Hence, if he is aware of the facts, and does not protest and
evince opposition, he will be liable under the Tributorian Action.

\(4) The term "control" must be extended to both sexes, and also to all
such as are subject to the power of others.

\(5) The Tributorian Action will be applicable not only to slaves, but
also to such as are serving us in good faith, whether they are free
born, the slaves of others, or those in whom we have an usufruct,

\2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Provided that the merchandise which is handled with the money of the
*peculium* belongs to us.

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where, however, a slave is held in common, and both owners are aware of
the fact, an action will be granted against either of them, but if one
of them knows and the other is ignorant, an action will be granted
against the one who knows; and whatever is due to the one who was
ignorant will be deducted in full. But if anyone should sue the owner
who is ignorant, since proceedings are brought against him on the
*peculium*, what was due to the party who knew will be deducted, and,
indeed, in full; for if he himself was sued in the action on the
*peculium*, what is owing to him would be deducted in full. This
Julianus stated in the Twelfth Book of the Digest.

\(1) If the slave of a ward or of an insane person, with the knowledge
of his guardian or curator, employs the funds of the *peculium* in
business transactions, I am of the opinion that the fraud of the
guardian or of the curator should not prejudice the ward, or the insane
person, nor should it be a source of gain to him; and hence he ought not
to be liable to the Tributorian Action, on account of the fraud of the
guardian, only so far as he may have derived any advantage from it. I
think that the same rule applies to an insane person, although
Pomponius, in the Eighth Book of Epistles, stated that if a guardian is
solvent, his ward is liable on account of his fraud, and it is evident
that he will be liable to such an extent that he must assign the right
of action which he has against his guardian.

\(2) Again, if fraud was committed by the ward himself, and he is of
such an age as to be capable of it, it has the effect of rendering him

liable; although his knowledge may not be sufficient for the transaction
of business. What course must then be pursued? The knowledge of the
guardian and curator should furnish ground for this action, and I have
shown to what extent fraud may cause injury.

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

If the ward, whose guardian was aware of the facts, is guilty of fraud
after reaching puberty, or the insane person when he becomes of sound
mind, they will be liable under this Edict.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Pomponius does not doubt, however, neither do we, that the knowledge and
the malicious intent of an agent prejudice the principal.

\(1) Where the sub-slave of my slave transacts business, and I am aware
of the fact, I shall be liable to the Tributorian Action, but if I am
not aware of it, and the chief slave is, Pomponius states in the
Sixtieth Book, that an action *De peculio* should be granted, and that
nothing should be deducted from the *peculium* of the sub-slave for what
he owes to the chief slave, while what is due to me should be deducted.

But if both of us were aware of the facts, he says that both the
Tributorian Action and the one on the *peculium* will lie; the
Tributorian Action on account of the sub-slave, and that on the
*peculium* on account of the chief slave; but the plaintiff must decide
under which action he would rather proceed, but in such a way that
contribution shall be made of both what is due to me and what is due to
the chief slave, while if the latter was ignorant of the facts, whatever
was due to him from the sub-slave should be deducted in full.

\(2) Moreover, where a female slave transacts business, we hold that the
Tributorian Action will lie.

\(3) Again, it makes little difference whether the contract is entered
into with the slave himself or with his business manager.

\(4) The terms, "On account of the business," are added with good
reason, in order to prevent every kind of transaction carried on with
him from affording ground for the Tributorian Action.

\(5) By means of this action it is established that everything connected
with the merchandise, or which has been received on account of it, shall
be subject to contribution.

\(6) Those who have slaves under their control are called upon to
contribute, together with the creditors of the business.

\(7) The question arose, however, whether the master has a right to
share in the division of the merchandise only to the extent of what is
due to him on account of the same; or whether he can do so on account of
other matters? Labeo says that this is the case where money is due to
him for any reason whatsoever; and that it makes very little difference
whether the slave became indebted to him before or after the business
was transacted, for it is sufficient that he has lost the privilege of
deduction.

\(8) What would be the case, however, if those who contracted with the
slave received the merchandise itself by way of pledge? I think

that it should be said that they will be preferred to the master by the
right of pledge.

\(9) Whether the debt is owing to the master or to those who are under
his control, contribution must be made in every instance.

\(10) Where there are two or more masters, contribution should be made
to each of them in proportion to his debt.

\(11) The entire *peculium*, however, is not subject to contribution,
but only that which is connected with the business, whether it consists
of merchandise, or whether the price of the latter has been received and
placed in a *peculium.*

\(12) Again, if money was due for merchandise from parties to whom the
slave was accustomed to make sales, this also will be subject to
contribution to the extent of the receipts.

\(13) If, in addition to merchandise, this slave has in the shop
utensils belonging to the business, are these also subject to
contribution? Labeo says that they are, and this is perfectly just, for
generally, and in fact always, such tools are derived from the stock.
Other articles, however, which he had in the *peculium* will not be
liable to contribution, as for instance, if he had silver or gold,
except where he acquired them with money obtained from trade.

\(14) Moreover, if he employed slaves in the business who had been
acquired with the proceeds of the same, these also will be subject to
contribution.

\(15) If the slave had several creditors, but some of them were engaged
in certain branches of commerce, are all of them to be brought in and
called upon to share in the contribution; for example, if he was engaged
in two kinds of business, such as cloak making and the weaving of linen,
and had separate creditors? It is my opinion that they should be called
upon separately to share in the contribution, for each of them gave
credit rather to the business than to the party himself.

\(16) Moreover, if he had two shops devoted to the same kind of
business, and I, for example, purchased goods at the shop in the
*Bucinum*, and someone else made purchases in that across the Tiber; I
think it would be perfectly just that the contributions should be made
separately, to avoid having one set of creditors indemnified out of the
property of the other, and the latter suffer loss.

\(17) It is evident that if merchandise is offered for sale in the same
shop, even if what was there had been obtained with the money of one of
the creditors, it will all be subject to contribution, unless it was
pledged to the creditor.

\(18) If, however, I have delivered my merchandise to be sold, and it is
still in existence, let us consider whether it will not be unjust that I
should be called upon for contribution? If, however, I have only a claim
against the slave, there will be ground for contribution, but if this is
not the case, for the reason that property which is sold does not cease
to belong to me, even though I have disposed of it, unless the money has
been paid, or a surety furnished, or satisfaction made in some other
manner; it must be said that I can bring an action for recovery.

\(19) Contribution, however, is made in proportion to the amount which
is due to each one; and therefore if one creditor appears asking for
contribution, he will obtain his share in full, but since it may happen
that there is one other or several other creditors of the business
conducted with a *peculium, *this creditor must furnish security that he
will refund *pro rata* if other creditors should appear.

\6. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

For this action does not, like that on the *peculium*, make the
condition of the prior claimant the better, but it makes that of all of
them the same, no matter when they file their claims.

\7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

He should also furnish security that, if anything else should be found
to be due to the master, he will refund it to him *pro rata;* for
suppose that a conditional debt is about to be due, or that there is one
which has been concealed; this also must be admitted, for the master
should not suffer injury, even though he may be called to share in the
contribution.

\(1) What, however, must be done if the master refuses to make
contribution, or to take this trouble, but is prepared to surrender the
*peculium* or the goods? Pedius states that he should be heard, and this
opinion is equitable; and generally, the prætor should appoint an
arbiter, by whose intervention the goods belonging to the *peculium* may
be distributed.

\(2) Where, through the malicious contrivance of anyone, the result is
that the proper contribution was not made, the Tributorian Action is
granted against him, in order to compel him to make good the amount by
which what was contributed is less than it should have been. This action
acts as a restraint upon the malicious intent of the master. It is held
that too little is contributed, if nothing is contributed. Where,
however, he, being ignorant of what the slave has invested in
merchandise, contributes too little, he is not held to have acted with
malicious intent; but if, having ascertained the facts, he neglects to
make proper contribution, he is now not free from fraud. Hence if he
obtains payment to himself out of the merchandise, he is, in fact, held
to have fraudulently contributed too little.

\(3) Again, if he permitted the property to be destroyed, or to be
converted to an improper purpose, or intentionally sold it at too low a
price, or did not require payment from the purchasers; it must be held
that he will be liable to the Tributorian Action, if fraudulent intent
existed.

\(4) Moreover, if the master denies that anything is due to anybody, it
should be considered whether there is ground for the Tributorian Action.
The opinion of Labeo that this action will lie is the better one;
otherwise it will be expedient for the master to set up a denial.

\(5) This action is both perpetual and granted against the heir, but
only for the amount which conies into his hands:

\8. *Julianus, Digest, Book XI.*

Because the proceeding is not based upon fraud, but includes the
prosecution of a claim, and therefore, even if the slave is dead, the
master, as well as his heir, should be held perpetually liable for the
act of the deceased; although the action will not lie except where fraud
has been committed.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

What we state with respect to the heir will also apply to other
successors.

\(1) A party must elect by what kind of an action he will proceed,
whether by the one on the *peculium*, or by the Tributorian Action,
since he knows that he can not have recourse to the other. It is clear
that if anyone desires to bring the Tributorian Action for one claim,
and the one *De peculio* for another, he should be heard.

\(2) Labeo says that if the *peculium* is bequeathed to a slave
manumitted by will, the heir should not be liable to the Tributorian
Action, as neither has obtained anything nor has been guilty of fraud.
Pomponius, in the Sixtieth Book, states that the heir is liable to the
Tributorian Action, unless he took care to obtain security for himself
from the slave, or deducted from the *peculium* what should have been
contributed. This opinion is not unreasonable, since he who acted in
such a way as to avoid contribution is himself guilty of malicious
contrivance. For the action against the heir with reference to what
comes into his hands will be granted by us, as often as he is sued on
account of the fraud of the deceased, but not when he is sued on account
of his own.

\10. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

The action *De peculio* can also be brought against a purchaser of the
slave; but the Tributorian Action can not.

\11. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

It is sometimes more expedient for parties to bring suit by the action
*De peculio* than by the Tributorian Action, for in the one of which we
are treating that alone is subject to division which forms part of the
merchandise with which the business is transacted, and whatever has been
received on account of the same; but, in the action *De peculio* the
entire amount of the *peculium* (in which also the merchandise is
included) must be taken into consideration, and it may happen that the
business is being conducted perhaps with a half, or a third, or even a
smaller portion of the *peculium;* and it also may happen that nothing
is owing by the party to his father or owner.

\12. *Julianus, Digest, Book XII.*

One man brings a suit against the master on account of the slave, only
on the *peculium*, another institutes proceedings under the Tributorian
Action; the question arises whether the master ought to deduct from the
*peculium* what he will have to make good to the plaintiff in the
Tributorian Action? The answer is that proceedings can be instituted
under the Tributorian Action only where the master, in distri-

buting the value of the merchandise, did not comply with the terms of
the Prætor's Edict; that is, when he has deducted a greater part of his
own debt than he has apportioned among the creditors; as, for instance,
where the merchandise was worth thirty *aurei* of which he himself had
lent fifteen, and two other creditors had lent thirty, he deducted the
entire fifteen, and gave the creditors the remaining fifteen, when he
should only have deducted ten, and have given each of the creditors ten.
Therefore, when he has acted in this way, it is not to be understood
that he has released the slave from liability to him, for the reason
that he still must pay five *aurei *on his account in the Tributorian
Action. Wherefore, if he institutes proceedings with reference to the
*peculium*, (if by chance there should be other *peculium* than that
invested in the business) he has a right to deduct five *aurei* as being
still a creditor of

the slave.

TITLE V.

CONCERNING TRANSACTIONS SAID TO HAVE TAKEN PLACE WITH A PERSON UNDER THE
CONTROL OF ANOTHER.

\1. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

The Proconsul takes every precaution to enable one party who has
contracted with another that is under the control of a third, where the
above mentioned actions (that is to say the exercitorian, the
institorian, and the tributorian) do not apply, to still obtain his
rights, so far as circumstances permit, on the grounds of equity and
justice. For if the business was transacted by the order of the party
under whose control the person in question is, he promises an action for
the entire amount with reference to the same; but if this did not take
place under his direction, but he, nevertheless, profited by it, the
Proconsul introduces an action to the extent to which this has been
done, and if neither of these conditions exist, he establishes an action
for the amount of the *peculium.*

\2. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The Prætor says: "After proper cause is shown I will grant an action for
the amount that the party is able to pay against anyone who is
emancipated or disinherited, or who has rejected the estate of the
person under whose control he was at the time the former died; whether
the business was transacted on his own responsibility, or with the
consent of the party to whose control he was subject; and whether this
was done for the benefit of his own *peculium*, or for that of the
estate of him under whose control he was."

\(1) Further, if he had become his own master without emancipation, or
was given in adoption and his natural father afterwards died, and,
moreover, if he had been appointed heir to a very small share of the
estate, it is perfectly just that, after investigation, an action should
be granted against him for the amount that he is able to pay.

\3. *The Same, Disputations, Book III.*

Should it be discussed in this instance whether what is due to others
should be deducted? And, indeed if the parties who contracted with

him when he was under the control of another are creditors, it may
properly be held that the position of the prior claimant is the
preferable one; except where there is a privileged creditor, for, not
without reason consideration will be paid to this prior creditor. But if
there are creditors who contracted with him after he became his own
master, I think that they should be considered.

\4. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

But where the son is appointed heir of a larger portion of the estate,
it is in the choice of the creditor whether he will sue him for the
share of the estate to which he is entitled, or for the entire amount of
the claim. In this instance also it is the duty of the judge to decide
whether he should be sued only for the amount which he is able to pay.

\(1) Sometimes, however, if the son is disinherited or emancipated, an
action will be granted against him for the entire amount; for example,
if, when the contract was made with him, he denied that he was the head
of the household; for Marcellus stated in the Second Book of the Digest
that an action can be brought against him on account of his falsehood,
even if he is not able to pay.

\(2) Although an action can be brought against him on his contracts only
for the amount that he is able to pay, still, he may be sued for the
entire amount on account of his offences.

\(3) Relief is granted to the son alone, and not to his heir also; for
Papinianus states in the Ninth Book of Questions that an action for the
entire indebtedness should be granted against the heir of the son.

\(4) But ought not the lapse of time be considered, so that, if
proceedings are instituted without delay against the son, the action may
be granted for what he is able to pay, but if many years have elapsed he
should not be indulged in this way? It seems to me that it ought to be
considered, for the investigation of the case will include this.

\(5) Where a party brings suit on the *peculium* when he could have
brought an action on the ground of having been expressly authorized, he
is in the position of not being able subsequently to bring an action on
the ground of special authority given; and this is the opinion of
Proculus. But if the plaintiff, having been deceived, brings the action
*De peculio*, Celsus thinks that he is entitled to relief, and this
opinion is reasonable.

\5. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where a son under paternal control is sued and has judgment rendered
against him during the lifetime of his father, an action on the
judgment^1^ should be granted against him to the extent of his ability
to pay, if he has been subsequently emancipated or disinherited.

^1^ In the early days of Roman jurisprudence, and, indeed, for a
considerable period during the Empire, the authority to issue execution
on a judgment was not vested in the court, but it was left to the
discretion of the plaintiff, to whose tender mercies the unsuccessful
party was, to all intents and purposes, abandoned.

\(1) If the estate of his father has been restored to a disinherited son
under the Trebellian Decree of the Senate, judgment should not be
rendered against him to the extent of his capacity to pay, but for the
entire amount, because, in fact, he is, in some respects, an heir.

\(2) But if, having been forced to do so, he has interfered with the
estate for the purpose of transferring it, the same proceedings should
be taken as if he had rejected it.

\6. *Ulpianus, Disputations, Book II.*

Marcellus states that a person who pretends to be the head of a family
and enters into a stipulation under the direction of any one, is liable
to an action on mandate, even though he cannot make good the amount;
and, in fact, it is true that he should be liable, because he has been
guilty of fraud. This also can be said with reference to all actions
based on good faith.

\7. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

A father allowed his son to borrow money, and directed the creditor by
letter to lend it to him, and the son became an heir to his father for a
very small portion of the estate. I answered that the creditor could
decide whether he would prefer to sue the son, to whom he had lent the
money, for the entire amount, or the heirs, each in proportion to the
share to which he had succeeded. Judgment was rendered against the son
to the extent of his capacity to pay.

\8. *Paulus, Decrees, Book I.*

Titianus Primus appointed a slave for the purpose of lending money and
taking pledges; and the said slave was also accustomed to bind himself
for, and to pay the obligations of persons who dealt in barley. The
slave having run away, and the party to whom he had been substituted to
pay the price of the barley having sued his master on account of the
business manager, he denied he could be sued on this ground, because he
had not been appointed for the transaction of this business. But as it
was proved that the same slave had transacted other business and had
rented granaries, and paid money to many people, the Prefect of
Subsistence rendered a decision against the master.

It was provided by the Laws of the Twelve Tables that the time which
intervened between three markets or *nundinæ*, that is, about thirty
days, must elapse before further proceedings could be taken against the
defendant. If by that time he had not paid the claim, the plaintiff was
entitled to the *Actio permanus injectionem*, a process equivalent to
arrest, by which he brought the debtor by force, if necessary, before
the judicial tribunal, and if he still remained unwilling or unable to
satisfy his creditor, the latter was authorized to remove and imprison
him, or otherwise restrain him of his liberty. The constant abuse of the
privilege led to its substantial modification, and in more recent times
the unfortunate defendant was treated with some degree of leniency. Prom
this proceeding was derived the *Actio judicati*, or suit to enforce
judgment, which was brought before the Prætor as a preliminary to
execution. No analogy existed between it and execution at Common Law
where the process was issued directly by the Court.  ED.

We stated that he appeared to be a kind of surety, since he was paying
the debts of another, for he assumed payment in behalf of others, but
that it was not usual for an action to be granted against a master for a
reason of this kind, nor did it appear that the master had directed him
to do this. But as he seemed to have appointed the slave to act in his
behalf in all these transactions, the Emperor confirmed the decision.

TITLE VI. CONCERNING THE MACEDONIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

The words of the Macedonian Decree of the Senate are as follows:
"Whereas, among the other causes of crime which nature bestowed upon
him, Macedo also added indebtedness, and as he who lends money on
doubtful security (without saying any more) often furnishes material for
wrong-doing to parties who are evilly disposed; it is hereby decreed
that no action or claim shall be granted to anyone who has lent money to
a son under paternal control, even after the death of the parent to
whose authority he was subject, so that those who, by lending money at
interest, set an extremely bad example, may learn that the obligation of
no son under paternal control can become a valid claim by waiting for
the death of his father."

\(1) If the question as to whether the son is under parental control is
in abeyance, for instance, because his father is in the hands of the
enemy, the question as to whether the Decree of the Senate has been
violated is itself in abeyance; for if he should again come under
parental control, the Decree of the Senate will become operative, but if
he does not, it will not apply; and therefore in the meantime an action
should be refused.

\(2) It is certain that if a party who has been arrogated borrows money
and afterwards obtains restitution, so that he can be emancipated, the
Decree of the Senate will be available, for he was a son under paternal
control.

\(3) Any office held by a son under paternal control will not cause the
Macedonian Decree of the Senate to become inoperative; for even though
he be Consul, or hold any other office, the Decree of the Senate
applies, unless he should have *castrense peculium*, for in this
instance the Decree of the Senate will not be applicable.

\2. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LX1V.*

To the extent that this has reference to the *castrense peculium, *since
sons under paternal control perform the functions of heads of families,
so far as the *castrense peculium* is concerned.

\3. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where anyone believed an individual to be the head of a family, not
having been deceived by vain folly or ignorance of law, but because he
was publicly considered by most persons to be such, and acted,

made contracts, and performed the duties of offices as the head of a
household, the Decree of the Senate will not be applicable.

\(1) Wherefore, Julianus states in the Twelfth Book of the Digest that
the Decree of the Senate will not apply in the case of a party who was
accustomed to farm out the public revenues, and this has been frequently
decided by the Emperor.

\(2) Hence, where a person could not know whether another was a son
under paternal control or not, Julianus says, in the Twelfth Book, that
the Decree of the Senate will not be applicable; as, for instance, in
the case of a ward or a minor under twenty-five years

of age.

But so far as the minor is concerned, relief should be granted by the
Prætor after investigation, but in the case of the ward, he should say
that the Decree of the Senate was not operative for another reason, that
is, because the money which the ward pays without the authority of his
guardian does not become a loan; just as Julianus himself states in the
Twelfth Book of the Digest, that if a son under paternal control makes a
loan the Decree of the Senate is not applicable, since the money does
not become a loan even if he had the unrestricted management of the
*peculium.* For the father, when he granted him the management of the
*peculium*, did not give him permission to waste it, and therefore he
says the right to bring suit for the recovery of the money remains with
the father.

\(3) Only he, however, violates the Decree of the Senate who lent money
to a son under paternal control, not one who contracted otherwise, for
example, one who has sold, leased, or entered into a contract of another
kind, for it was the giving of money which was held to be dangerous to
their parents. And therefore, even though I have become the creditor of
a son under paternal control, either because of purchase, or on account
of some other contract in which I have not paid down any money, but in
which I made a stipulation; although the transaction has become a loan,
still, as the payment of money did not take place, the Decree of the
Senate will not be applicable.

This, however, can only be said where no fraud on the Decree of the
Senate is intended; so that the party who could not lend money preferred
to sell to him, in order that he might have the price of the

property instead of a loan.

\(4) If I entered into a stipulation with a son under paternal control,
and lent him money after he became the head of the household, whether
his change of civil status had occurred through the death of his father,
or he had become his own master in some other way without affecting his
civil rights; it should be held that the Decree of the Senate is not
operative, because the loan was made to one who was already the head of
a family;

\4. *Scævola, Questions, Book II.*

For what is commonly stated, namely: that it is not lawful to lend to a
son under paternal control, does not relate to the terms of the
transaction, but to the payment of the money.

\5. *Paulus, Questions, Book III.*

Therefore, in this instance, judgment will be rendered against him for
the entire amount, and not for what he is able to pay.

\6. *Scævola, Questions, Book II.*

On the other hand, it is very properly stated that, if you have entered
into a stipulation with the head of a family, and afterwards lend the
money to him when he has become a son under paternal control, the power
of the Decree of the Senate should be exercised, because the substantial
part of the obligation was completed by the payment of the money.

\7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Also, if a son subject to paternal control becomes a surety, Neratius
states in the First and Second Book of Opinions that the Decree of the
Senate is not applicable. Celsus says the same thing in the Fourth Book,
but Julianus adds that if a pretext is sought, in order that a son under
paternal control, who was about to receive a loan, may become a surety,
another party appearing as the principal debtor; the fraud committed
against the Decree of the Senate causes prejudice, and that an exception
should be granted to the son under paternal control as well as to the
principal debtor, since relief is granted also to the surety of a son.

\(1) He also says that if I accept two debtors, a son under paternal
control and Titius, when the money was to come into the hands of the
former, but I accept Titius as the principal debtor, in order that, as
surety, he might not take advantage of the Decree of the Senate; an
exception based upon this fraudulent act should be granted.

\(2) Moreover, if a son under paternal control when his father had been
exiled or was absent for a long time, promised a dowry for his daughter,
and gave property of his father in pledge; the Decree of the Senate will
not apply, and the property of the father will not be liable. It is
evident that if the son becomes the heir of his father, and brings an
action to recover the pledge, he will be barred by an exception on the
ground of fraud.

\(3) It should be considered whether we ought to hold that a loan is not
only the payment of money, but, in fact, the delivery of everything
which can be lent. The words, however, seem to me to refer to money
paid, for the Decree of the Senate says, "Has lent money." But if a
fraud has been committed on the Decree of the Senate, for example, where
grain, wine, or oil is lent, so that, these things having been sold, the
money obtained from them may be used, relief should be granted to a son
under paternal control.

\(4) Where the son was under the control of one party when the loan was
made, and is now under that of another, the intention of the Decree of
the Senate remains, and an exception will therefore be granted.

\(5) But if it was not the death of the father, but something else which
happened to him, through which his civil status was changed, it must be
said that the Decree of the Senate will be operative.

\(6) The action should be denied not only to the party who lent the
money, but also to his successors.

\(7) Hence, if one person paid the money and another made the
stipulation, the exception would be granted against the latter, even
though he did not make the payment. But if one or the other of them was
not aware that he was under the control of his father, the severe rule
that the rights of both are prejudiced, is applicable. This is also the
case where two debtors enter into the stipulation.

\(8) Moreover, if I accepted two sons under paternal control as debtors,
but thought that one of them was the head of a family; it will make a
difference which of them got the money, so that, if I was aware that the
one to whom the money went was a son under paternal control, I shall be
barred by an exception; but if I did not know into whose hands it came,
I will not be barred.

\(9) The Decree of the Senate will apply whether the money was

lent at interest, or without it.

\(10) Although the Senate does not state to whom it grants the
exception, still, it must be remembered that the heir of a son under
paternal control, if he dies the head of a family, and his father, if he
dies under paternal control, can make use of the exception.

\(11) Sometimes, however, even though there is ground for the Decree of
the Senate, still, an action will be granted against a third party; as,
for instance, if a son under paternal control, who is a business
manager, borrowed money; for Julianus states in the Twelfth Book that
the business manager himself can make use of the exception based on the
Decree of the Senate, if suit is brought against him; but the
Institorian Action will lie against the party who appointed

him.

He further says that if the father himself had appointed him to carry on
his business, or he was permitted to manage his own *peculium* the
Decree of the Senate would not be available, since he would be held to
have contracted with the consent of the father; for if the latter knew
that he was transacting business, he may be held to have permitted this
also, if he did not expressly forbid it.

\(12) Thus, if he has borrowed money and employed it in his father's
business, the Decree of the Senate will not apply, for he borrowed it
for his father and not for himself. But if in the beginning he did not
borrow it for this purpose, but afterwards employed it in the business
of his father, Julianus says in the Twelfth Book of the Digest that the
Decree of the Senate does not apply, and that he must be understood to
have received it in the first place with the intention of employing it
in his father's business. He will not, however, be held to have employed
it in this manner if he pays to his father, for the settlement of his
own debt, money which he has borrowed; and therefore, if his father was
not aware of it, the Decree of the Senate will still be operative.

\(13) Where it is stated that the Decree of the Senate does not apply in
the case of a person who, being absent for the purpose of prosecuting
his studies, borrowed money; it will be applicable if he, when borrowing
the money, did not exceed a moderate limit, or, at all events, the
amount with which his father was accustomed to provide him.

\(14) If a son has borrowed money in order to satisfy someone who, if he
should bring suit could not be barred by an exception, an exception
based on the Decree of the Senate will not be available.

\(15) Again, the Decree of the Senate will not apply if the father
begins to pay what the son has borrowed, just as if he ratified the act.

\(16) If, after he has become the head of a family, he pays part of the
debt, the Decree of the Senate will not apply, and he cannot recover
what he paid.

\8. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

If, however, payment has been made through ignorance by a curator, the
amount can be recovered.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

But if, when he has become the head of a family, he gives property by
way of pledge, it must be said that the exception based on the Decree of
the Senate should be refused him, to the extent of the value of the
pledge.

\(1) Where the son pays the creditor money which has been given to him,
can a father claim said money as belonging to him, or can he recover it
by a personal action? Julianus says that if, in fact, the money was
given to him on the condition that he should pay it to the creditor, it
must be held to have passed immediately from the donor to the creditor,
and to have become the property of him who received it, but if it was
merely given to him, the son had no right to dispose of the money, and
therefore, if he paid it, an action for its recovery will lie in behalf
of the father, in any event.

\(2) This Decree of the Senate has reference also to daughters under
paternal control, nor does it signify if they are said to have obtained
ornaments with the money; for an action is refused by a Decree of the
most eminent Order of the State to a party who has lent money to a son
under paternal control; and it makes no difference whether the coins
have been consumed, or still exist as part of the *peculium.* Much more,
therefore, should a party who has lent money to a daughter under
paternal control have his contract disapproved by the severity of the
Decree of the Senate.

\(3) Relief is not only granted to a son under paternal control and to
his father, but also to his surety, and to the party under whose
direction he acted, and who themselves may have recourse to the action
on mandate, unless they have intervened with the intention of making a
gift; for then, as they have no recourse to him, the Decree of the
Senate will not be applicable. If, however, the parties intervened,

not with the intention of making a gift, but at the wish of the father,
the entire contract will be held to have been approved by the latter.

\(4) Those also have intervened in behalf of a son under paternal
control without the consent of the father, cannot recover after they
have made payment; for this was decreed also by the Divine Hadrian, and
it may be said that they will not recover their money. Still, however,
they are protected by a perpetual exception, and so is the son himself,
but he does not recover, for the reason that those only cannot regain
what they have paid who are released from an action by way of penalty on
the creditors, and not because the law intended that they should be
absolutely discharged from liability.

\(5) Although they cannot recover after having paid,

\10. *Paulus, On the Edict, Booh XXX.* Because the natural obligation
remains;

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Still, if not having pleaded an exception, they have judgment rendered
against them, they can make use of the exception based on the Decree of
the Senate. Julianus stated this in the case of a son who was himself
under paternal control, just as in the case of a woman who becomes a
surety.

\12. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where money is lent to a son with the mere knowledge of his father, it
must be said that the Decree of the Senate is not applicable. But if the
father directed the loan to be made to the son, and afterwards changed
his mind without the creditor being aware of the fact, there will be no
ground for the Decree of the Senate, as the beginning of the contract
should be considered.

\13. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

If we enter into a stipulation with a son under paternal control, for
the payment of a loan made to a third party for the purpose of renewal,
Julianus says that the Decree of the Senate will be no impediment.

\14. *Julianus, Digest, Book XII.*

I have a son, and a grandson by him; a loan was made to my grandson
under the direction of his father, the question arose whether this was
done in violation of the Decree of the Senate? I stated that even though
sons are included in the terms of the Decree of the Senate, still, the
same rule should be observed also in the case of a grandson; but the
direction of his father will not prevent the loan of the money from
being considered as made in violation of the Decree of the Senate, as he
himself is in such a position that he cannot borrow money if his father
is unwilling.

\15. *Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.*

It makes no difference who has made a loan to a son under paternal
control, whether it is a private individual or a city; for the Divine

Severus and Antoninus stated in Rescript that the Decree of the Senate
is also operative in the case of a city.

\16. *Paulus, Opinions, Book IV.*

If a son under paternal control during the absence of his father,
borrows money as having received a mandate from his father, and enters
into an obligation, and sends letters to his father to pay the money in
a province; his father, if he disapproves of the act of his son, should
immediately send a statement of his wish to the contrary.

\17. *The Same, Sentences, Book II.*

Where a son under paternal control borrows money for the purpose of
giving it as a dowry for his sister, his father will be liable to an
action for property employed in his affairs; for he will have a right to
recover the dowry if the girl dies during marriage.

\18. *Venuleius, Stipulations, Book II.*

Julianus states that the creditor of a son under paternal control cannot
receive a surety after the death of the latter, because no civil or
natural obligation with which the surety is connected survives; but it
is evident that a surety can be properly received from the father on
account of the action on the *peculium* which may be brought against
him.

\19. *Pomponius, Various Passages, Book VII.*

Julianus states that an exception based on the Macedonian Decree of the
Senate offers no hindrance to anyone except to a party who knew, or
could have known, that he to whom he made the loan was a son under
paternal control.

\20. *The Same, On the Decrees of the Senate, Book V.*

If a person to whom money was lent while he was under the control of his
father, after he himself becomes the head of the family, through
ignorance makes a promise of the money in such a way that a new
obligation is created, and suit is brought on the stipulation, an
exception founded on the facts should be filed.
