# -*- mode: org -*-

THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK VI.

TITLE I.
CONCERNING ACTIONS FOR THE RECOVERY OF SPECIFIC PROPERTY.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

After actions which are open for the recovery of an entire amount, there
is added the action for the recovery of certain specific property.

\(1) This action *in rem* for the recovery of specific property is
applicable to all movables, both animals and to such things as are
destitute of life, as well as to those where land is involved.

\(2) By means of this action, however, no claim can be asserted for
persons who are free but over whom we have some control, as for
instance, children who are subject to paternal authority; hence
proceedings instituted on their account are either investigations by a
magistrate, or interdicts, or suits brought before the prætor; and as
Pomponius says in the Thirty-seventh Book: "Unless the party states the
nature of his claim"; as where he claims his son as belonging to him, or
being under his control, in accordance with the law of Rome. In this
instance it seems to me, as well as to Pomponius, that his method of
procedure is proper, for he says that a party can, under the law
governing Roman citizenship bring an action for recovery where he states
the basis of his claim.

\(3) By means of this action not only can specific property be
recovered, but, Pomponius, in the Twenty-fifth Book of Passages, says

that an action may be brought for a flock, and also for a herd of
cattle, and for a stud of horses, as well, and it may be said for all
other animals which are kept together in droves. It is sufficient if the
flock itself belongs to us, even though individual heads of the same may
not be ours, for it is the flock which is claimed, and not the
individuals constituting the same.

\2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

Where equal numbers of a flock belong to two parties, neither of them
has a right to bring an action for the entire flock, nor even for half
of it. Where, however, one has a larger number than the other, so that
if those that do not belong to him are removed, he can still claim the
flock, those which are not his will not be included among those to be
surrendered.

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Marcellus states in the Fourth Book of the Digest, that a man had a
flock of three hundred head of which he lost one hundred, and purchased
an equal number of others from a person who owned them, or was the
*bona-fide *possessor, although they belonged to some one else; these
animals also he says will be included in the suit for recovery; and even
where there are no others remaining, except such as have been purchased,
he can still include them in his suit to recover the flock.

\(1) The objects which compose the equipment of a vessel must be sued
for separately, and suit for the boat belonging to the ship also must be
brought in the same manner.

\(2) Pomponius says that where articles of the same description are so
confused and mingled that they cannot be detached and separated, an
action must be brought to recover, not all of them, but a portion of the
same; as for instance, where my silver and yours is melted into a single
mass it will be our common property; and either of us can bring an
action for the recovery of an amount proportionate to the weight which
we own in said mass, even though it may be uncertain to what weight each
one of us is entitled.

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

In this instance an action can also be brought for the division of
common property, but a party will be liable to an action for theft as
well as to one for the production of property in court, if he
fraudulently manages to have the silver commingled; as in an action for
the production of property the amount of the value must be taken into
consideration, and, in one for the division of property in common or in
one for recovery, the party whose silver was greater in value will
obtain the most.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Pomponius also says that where grain belonging to two persons was mixed
without their consent, each one of them will be entitled to an action
*in rem *for such an amount of the heap as appears to belong

to him; but, where the grain was mingled with their consent, it will
then be held to be in common, and an action for the division of property
owned in common will lie.

\(1) He also says that if a mixture should be made of my honey and your
wine, some authorities think that this also becomes common property; but
I maintain the better opinion to be, (and he himself mentioned it) that
the mixture belongs to the party who made it; as it does not retain its
original character. Where, however, lead is mixed with silver, for the
reason that it can be separated it will not become common property, nor
can an action for the division of common property be brought; but an
action *in rem* will lie because the metals can be separated. But he
says that, where they cannot be separated, as for instance, where bronze
and gold are mixed, suit for recovery must be brought in proportion to
the amount involved; and what was stated with reference to the mixture
of honey and wine will not apply, because though both materials are
mingled, they still remain.^1^

^1^ The Roman doctrine with reference to accessions was accepted almost
in its entirety by the old English jurists, who relied upon the
well-established principle: "*Accessorium sequitur principale.*" Bracton
says: "*Est et alia, que sit tantu humana natura operante, quæ sit p
adiunctione uni spiciei ad altera, eiusdem generis vel diversi, p
applubatura vel ferrilminatione, secundu qd' infra legitur, et ibi
dicitur, que pars alteri debet accrescere, Si aute p applubatura, minor
cedit maiori vel præciosiori: sed si neutra præciosior quilibz suu
vedicabit*.

"*Literæ anim licet sint auræ perinde mebranis, chartisue cedunt, sicut
ea solo cedere solet quæ edificantur vel inseruntur. Sed in picturis
erit cotrariu.*" (Bracton, *De Leg. et Consuet, Angliæ, *II, 3, 5.)

The rule is stated as follows in Fleta: "*Adquiruntur etiam res nobis
per specificationem; ut si quis de aliena materia speciem aliquam sibi
fecerit, factor dominus erit speeiei. Est & alms modus adquirendi per
confusionem; confunduntur enim liquida, ut mel, oleum, vinum;
confunduntur etiam solida, sicut aurum, argentum, plumbum & ferrum. Et
quod ex Us redigitur inter eos commune erit sive separari possit sive
non.*" (Fleta III, II, 14, 15.)

Under the Roman practice, the principal point always to be taken into
consideration was whether he who had added the property in question to
his own had, or had not acted in good faith. If it was established that
he had been guilty of fraud or dishonesty, he was liable to an action of
theft; otherwise  if the complainant had not given his consent  he was
required to make good the amount by which it was proved that he had
profited. In the kind of accession designated *specificatio*, which
occurred where a new substance or species was formed by the addition or
mingling of something belonging to another with that of the possessor,
the latter became the sole proprietor of the article, if its constituent
parts could not be separated and readily restored to their original
condition.

It is stated by Blackstone that a difference exists between the Civil
and the Common Law with reference to compensation, where one party
fraudulently and without the other's knowledge mixes the articles in
such a way that the separate ownership can no longer be determined. In a
case of this kind, the Civil Law, while permitting the injured party to
possess the article as proprietor, still concedes to the depredator a
certain amount to indemnify him, at least in part, for what he has
forfeited by his misconduct. The Common Law, however, is not so
indulgent, but vests the entire ownership in him who was deprived of his
property without his acquiescence or knowledge. (Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England II, XXVI, 7.)

The statutes of the various States of the Union, for the most part,
follow the rules laid down by the Civil and the Common Law. In all
instances of accession the principles of natural equity are required to
be diligently observed, and especially the maxim, "*Nemo ex alterius
detrimento fieri debet locupletari*".  ED.

\(2) He also states that where your stallion impregnated my mare, the
colt will not be yours but mine.

\(3) With reference to a tree which was transplanted into the field of
another and threw out roots, Varus and Nerva granted an equitable action
*in rem;* for if it had not yet taken root, it would not cease to be
mine.

\(4) Where proceedings *in rem* are instituted, and the parties agree
with reference to the property sued for, but a mistake is made in the
name of the latter, it is held that the action is properly brought.

\(5) Where there are several slaves of the same name, for instance,
several called Eros, and it is not apparent to which one the action
refers, Pomponius says that no decision can be rendered.

\6. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book VI*.

Where anyone brings an action *in rem*, he is obliged to designate the
thing, and also to state that he brings suit for all, or for a portion
of the same; for the word "thing" does not mean something in kind, but a
specific article. Octavenus says with reference to this, that a party
must state the weight of raw material, and where the property is
stamped, the number, and where goods have been manufactured, the nature
of the same.

\(1) The dimensions must also be given when the article can be measured.
If we bring suit claiming that certain clothing is ours, or that it
should be delivered to us, are we obliged to state the number of the
articles and the color also? The better opinion is that both those
things should be done; for it would be a hardship to compel us to say
whether our clothes are worn or new.

\(2) A difficulty arises occasionally with reference to household
utensils, namely, whether it is only necessary to mention a dish, or
whether we must add whether it is square or round, plain or ornamented,
for it is difficult to insert these additions in the complaint; nor
should the requirements be so rigid, although in an action to recover a
slave his name should be mentioned, and also whether he is a boy or a
grown man, and, by all means, this should be done if there is more than
one. But, if I am ignorant of his name, I must make use of some
description of him; as for example, that he is a portion of a certain
estate, or the son of a certain woman. In like manner, where a man
brings an action for land, he must state its name and where it is
situated.

\7. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XL*

Where a man who offers to conduct the defence of an action for the
recovery of land, loses his case, he has, nevertheless, a well grounded
right of action to recover it from the possessor, so Pedius says.

\8. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XII*.

Pomponius adopts the following opinion in the Thirty-sixth Book. If you
and I own a tract of land together, and you and Lucius Titius have
possession of it, I should not bring an action against you for both of
the quarters, but against Titius, who is not the owner, for the entire

half. It would be otherwise if both of you had possession of different
parts of the said tract; for then, undoubtedly, I would be compelled to
bring suit against you and Titius for your respective shares of the
entire tract; for, as parts of the land were severally held, a certain
portion of them must necessarily be mine; and therefore you yourself
must bring an action against Titius for a quarter of the same. This
distinction does not apply to movable property nor to a suit for the
recovery of an estate; for in these instances possession of property for
a divided part cannot exist.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

In this action, the duty of the judge would be to learn whether the
defendant is in possession or not; but it is not important under what
title he holds possession; for where I have proved the property to be
mine, the possessor will be required to surrender it unless he pleads
some exception. Certain authorities, however, and Pegasus among them,
hold that the only kind of possession involved in this action, is that
which applies where an interdict *Uti possidetis* or *Utrubi* is applied
for; as he says that where property is deposited with anyone, or loaned
to him; or where he hired it; or is in possession of the same to insure
the payment of legacies or of a dowry; or in behalf of an unborn child;
or where security was not given for the prevention of threatened injury;
since none of these instances admit of possession, an action for
recovery cannot be brought. I think, however, that suit can be brought
against anyone who holds property and has the power to surrender it.

\10. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

When suit is brought for movable property, where is it to be delivered,
that is, if it is not actually in the hands of the possessor? It is not
a bad regulation where a possessor in good faith is the party sued, for
the property to be delivered either where it is situated, or where the
action to recover it is brought; but this must be done at the expense of
the plaintiff, which has been incurred through travel by land and sea,
in addition to the cost of maintenance,

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Unless the plaintiff prefers that the property should be delivered at
his own expense and risk, where judgment is rendered; for then provision
will be made, with security, for delivery.

\12. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

Where, indeed, the defendant is a possessor in bad faith who obtained
the property in some other place, the same rule applies; but if he
removed it from the place where issue was joined and took it elsewhere,
he should, at his own expense, deliver it at the place whence he removed
it.

\13. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Not only must the property be delivered, but the judge must take into
account any deterioration which it may have sustained. Suppose,

for instance, that a slave is delivered who has been weakened, or
scourged, or wounded; the judge must then consider to what extent he may
have been diminished in value, although the possessor can be sued in an
action under the *Lex Aquilia*. Wherefore the question arises whether
the judge ought not to estimate the amount of damage caused, unless the
right of action under the *Lex Aquilia* is relinquished? Labeo thinks
that the plaintiff is obliged to give security that he will not bring
suit under the *Lex Aquilia; *and this opinion is the correct one.

\14. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXL*

If, however, the plaintiff should prefer to make use of the action under
the *Lex Aquilia*, the possessor must be released from liability.
Therefore the choice is given the plaintiff of obtaining not triple, but
double damages.

\15. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Again, if the defendant delivers the slave after he has been scourged,
Labeo says that the plaintiff is also entitled to an action for injury.

\(1) Where anyone sells property through necessity, perhaps it will be
the duty of the judge to relieve him so that he will only be compelled
to deliver the purchase-money; for if he has gathered the crops and sold
them to avoid their being spoiled; in this instance he will not be
compelled to deliver anything more than the price.

\(2) Moreover, if there was a field for which suit was brought, and it
was assigned to soldiers, in consideration of a small sum paid to the
possessor, must the latter deliver this also? It is my opinion that he
must do so.

\(3) Where suit is brought for a slave, or for some animal which died
without its death being caused by the malice or negligence of the
possessor, several authorities hold that the price should not be paid.
The better opinion, however, is that where the plaintiff would have sold
the property if he had obtained it, then the value ought to be paid if
the party was in default, for if he had delivered it, the other might
have sold it and have profited by the price.

\16. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

Undoubtedly, however, even where a slave dies, some decision must be
rendered with reference to profits and the offspring of a female slave,
and a stipulation entered into to provide for eviction; for the
possessor, after issue has been joined, is certainly not liable for
misfortune.

\(1) It is not understood to be a case of negligence where the possessor
dispatched a ship, which is the subject of litigation, across the sea at
a suitable time, even though she may have been lost; unless he committed
her to the care of incompetent persons.

\17. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Julianus says in the Sixth Book of the Digest, that if I purchase a
slave from Titius, who belonged to Mævius, and afterwards, when

Mævius brings an action against me to recover him, I sell him, and the
purchaser kills him, it is but just that I should pay the price received
for him to Mævius.

\(1) Julianus also states in the same Book, that if the possessor is in
default in delivering a slave, and the latter dies, an account of the
profits which accrued up to the time when the case was decided must be
taken into consideration. Julianus also says that not only the profits
must be surrendered, but everything connected with the property itself;
and therefore the offspring of a female slave, as well as the profits
derived from the latter. So far does this principle extend, that Julian
states in the Seventh Book, that if the possessor should acquire the
right of action through the slave under the *Lex Aquilia*, he should be
compelled to assign it.

But if the possessor should fraudulently have relinquished possession,
and someone has wrongfully killed the slave, he can be compelled either
to pay the value of the slave, or to assign his own right of action,
whichever the plaintiff may prefer. He must also surrender any profits
which he may have obtained from another possessor, as he cannot realize
anything through a slave the title of whom is in litigation. He is not,
however, obliged to surrender any profits which have accrued during the
time when the slave was in possession of the party who recovered him in
a suit. What Julianus states concerning an action under the *Lex
Aquilia* is applicable where the possessor has acquired a right to the
slave by usucaption, after issue has been joined, because he then begins
to have a perfect title.

\18. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Where the possessor has obtained a right to a slave through usucaption,
after issue has been joined, he must give him up and furnish security to
indemnify the plaintiff against fraud, so far as he is concerned; for
there is danger that he may have either pledged him or manumitted him.

\19. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Labeo says that security must also be given by the defendant that
everything has been properly transacted with reference to the property
in question; for example, where he has furnished security for the
prevention of threatened injury.

\20. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Again, the possessor must also deliver anything he may have obtained
through the slave after issue has been joined, but not what he acquired
by means of his own property, in which inheritances and legacies
obtained by him through the slave are included; for it is not sufficient
for his body alone to be delivered, but it is necessary that everything
connected with the property should also be given up; that is to say,
that the plaintiff should have everything he would have come into
possession of if the slave had been delivered to him at the time when
issue was joined. Therefore, the offspring of a female slave must be
surrendered, even though they may have been born after the pos-

sessor acquired ownership of the mother by usucaption; that is to say,
after issue was joined, in which instance delivery and the provision of
security against fraud must take place with reference to the offspring
as well as the mother.

\21. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

Where a slave runs away from a *bona-fide* possessor, we may ask whether
the slave was such a one as ought to have been guarded? For if he seemed
to have been of good reputation so that he should not have been kept in
custody, the possessor must be released from liability; but if, in the
meantime, he has obtained ownership of him by usucaption, he must assign
his rights of action to the plaintiff, and surrender the profits
obtained while he was in possession of the slave. If, however, he had
not yet obtained ownership of him by usucaption, he must be released
without giving security, so that he need not bind himself to the
plaintiff to pursue the slave; as the plaintiff himself can do so; but,
in the meantime, while the slave is in flight, can he become his owner
through usucaption? Pomponius says in the Thirty-ninth Book of the
Edict, that this is not unjust.

If, however, the slave should have been guarded, the possessor will be
liable for the slave; so that, even if he had not acquired ownership of
him by usucaption, the plaintiff must assign to him his rights of
action. Julianus, however, thinks in instances of this kind, that where
the possessor of the slave is released from liability on account of his
flight, although he is not compelled to furnish security to pursue him,
he must give a bond that if he should secure him, he will give him up.
Pomponius approves this opinion in the Thirty-fourth Book of Various
Passages, and it is the better one.

\22. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Where the slave escapes through the fraud of the possessor, judgment
shall be rendered against him as if he was in possession.

\23. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

A person is entitled to an action *in rem* where he has become the owner
of property either by the Law of Nations, or by the Civil Law.

\(1) Sacred and religious places cannot be sued for by actions *in rem,
*as if they were the property of individuals.

\(2) Where anyone attaches to his own property something which belongs
to another, so that it becomes a part of it; as for instance, where
anyone adds to a statue of his own an arm or a foot which belongs to
another, or a handle or a bottom to a cup, or a figure in relief to a
candlestick, or a foot to a table, the greater number of authorities
very properly state that he becomes the owner of the whole, and that he
truthfully can say that the statue or the cup is his.

\(3) Moreover, anything which is written on my paper or painted on my
board, immediately becomes mine; although certain authorities have
thought differently on account of the value of the painting; but where
one thing can not exist without the other, it must necessarily be given
with it.

\(4) Wherefore, in all these cases in which my property draws the
property of another to itself by superiority, it becomes mine; and if I
bring suit to recover it, I can be compelled by an exception on the
ground of fraud, to pay the increased value of the article.

\(5) Again, whatever is joined or added to anything else forms part of
it through accession, and the owner cannot bring suit to recover it so
long as the two articles remain attached; but he can institute
proceedings for them to be produced in court, in order that they may be
separated, and the suit for recovery be brought, except of course, in
the case stated by Cassius, where articles are welded together; for he
says that if an arm is welded to the statue to which it belongs, it is
absorbed by the unity of the greater part, and that anything which has
once become the property of another cannot revert to its former owner,
even if it should be broken off.

The same rule does not apply to anything that is soldered with lead;
because welding causes a mingling of the same material, but soldering
does not do this. Therefore, in all these instances, an action *in
factum* is necessary; that is where one for production, or *in rem* does
not lie. But with reference to articles which consist of distinct
objects, it is evident that the separate parts retain their peculiar
character; as for instance, separate slaves and separate sheep; and
therefore I can bring suit for the recovery of a flock of sheep, as
such, even though your ram may be among them, and you yourself can bring
suit to recover your ram.

The rule is not the same where an article consists of coherent parts,
for if you attach the arm of some other person's statue to a statue of
mine, it cannot be said that the arm is yours, because the entire statue
is embraced in one conception.

\(6) Where the building materials of one person have been used in the
house of another, an action will not lie to recover them on account of
the Law of the Twelve Tables; nor can suit be brought for the
production, except against the party who knowingly used the materials of
another in the construction of his own house; but recourse must be had
to the ancient action entitled *de tigno juncto*, which is for double
damages, and is derived from the Law of the Twelve Tables.

\(7) Moreover, where anyone builds a house on his own ground with stone
belonging to another, he can indeed bring suit to recover the house; but
the former owner can also bring an action to recover the stone, if it is
taken out, even though the house may have been demolished after the time
necessary for usucaption has elapsed, subsequent to the date when the
house comes into the possession of a *bona-fide* purchaser; for the
individual stones are not acquired by usucaption, even if the building
becomes the property of another through lapse of time.

\24. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

A party who intends to bring an action for the recovery of property
should consider whether he can obtain possession of it by means of some
interdict; because it is far more convenient for he himself to be

in possession, and to compel his adversary to assume the burden of
plaintiff, than to bring suit himself while the latter is in possession.

\25. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXX*.

Where a person undertakes the defence of a case without any good reason,
as he is not in possession and has not acted fraudulently to avoid being
in possession, Marcellus says he cannot have the case dismissed, if the
plaintiff is not informed of the facts, and this opinion is the correct
one; this, however, is on the presumption that issue has been joined.
But where a party, before issue is joined, avers that he is not in
possession when in fact he is not, and does not deceive the plaintiff
and departs, he cannot be held to have undertaken to defend the case.

\26. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book II*.

For if the plaintiff is aware of the facts, then he is not deceived by
another, but by himself; and therefore the defendant will be discharged.

\27. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

But if, when I wish to sue Titius, anyone should state that he is in
possession, and thereupon volunteers in defence of the case, and I prove
this by testimony during the trial, judgment must unquestionably be
rendered against the other party.

\(1) A party should be in possession not only when issue is joined, but
also when the decision is rendered. If he was in possession at the time
that issue was joined, but lost it without fraud on his part when the
case was decided, he should be released from liability. Again, if he was
not in possession at the time issue was joined, but had possession when
the case was decided, the opinion of Proculus must be accepted, namely:
that, by all means, a decision must be rendered against him, and hence
all profits from the time he acquired possession will be included in the
judgment.

\(2) Where a slave for whom suit is brought has become depreciated in
value through the malice of the possessor, and afterwards dies, not
through the fault of the former, but from some other cause; no estimate
shall be made of the amount of his diminution of value, because it makes
no difference to the plaintiff. This, however, has reference only to the
action *in rem;* for the right of action under the *Lex Aquilia*
continues.

\(3) A party who, before issue was joined, has fraudulently relinquished
the possession of property, is liable to an action *in rem;* and this
may be inferred from a decree of the Senate by which it is provided, as
we have already stated, that fraud previously committed is included in
the suit for the recovery of an estate; for if fraud which has been
committed is embraced in such an action, which itself is one *in rem*,
hence it is absurd for fraud already committed to be included in an
action *in rem* for the recovery of some specific article.

\(4) Where a father or the owner of a slave is in possession through his
son or through the slave, and either of the latter should be absent

at the time when judgment is rendered, without the fault of the said
father or owner; time should either be granted, or security be furnished
for the delivery of possession.

\(5) When the possessor incurs any expense with reference to the
property for which an action is brought, before issue is joined, an
account should be taken of said expense by means of an exception on the
ground of fraudulent intent; if the plaintiff perseveres in the action
to recover his property, without refunding the expenses. The same rule
will apply where the possessor defends a slave in a noxal action, and
having lost the case, pays the damages; or, by mistake, builds a house
on unoccupied land which belongs to the plaintiff, unless the latter
will permit him to remove the building.

Certain authorities have stated that this also should be done by the
Court that hears a case for the recovery of a dowry which involves land
given to the wife. But if you give instruction to your slave while he is
in your possession, Proculus thinks that this rule should not be
observed; because I ought not to be deprived of my slave, and the same
remedy cannot be applied which we have referred to above in the case of
the land.

\28. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Suppose, for example, that you have taught him to be an artist, or a
copyist; it is held that no estimate can be obtained by application to
the Court:

\29. *Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXI*.

Unless you are holding the slave for sale, and would get a better price
for him on account of his profession;

\30. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Or the plaintiff has been previously notified to pay the expense, and
he, seeking to avoid this, an exception on the ground of fraud has been
interposed by the defendant.

\31. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

But where a demand is made for profits in the case of a slave for whose
recovery an action is brought, the puberty of the slave must not only be
considered, but also what services he could render, even if he had not
arrived at that age. It would, however, be dishonorable for the
plaintiff to demand an accounting for the profits which might have been
obtained through the skill of the slave, because he obtained this at the
expense of the possessor.

\32. *Modestinus, Differences, Book VIII*.

If, however, he taught the slave some trade, then, after the latter has
reached the age of twenty-five years, the expenses incurred in doing so
may be set off.

\33. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXL*

Not only the profits which have been collected, but also those which
could honestly have been collected, must be estimated; and therefore,

if the property which is the subject of litigation should be lost either
through the fraud or negligence of the possessor, Pomponius thinks that
the opinion of Trebatius is the better one, namely, that an account must
be taken of the profits to the extent they would have existed if the
property had not been destroyed, that is to say, until the time the
decision was rendered; and this view is also accepted by Julianus.

Under this rule, if the owner of the mere property brings an action and
the usufruct is lost through delay, an account of the profits must be
calculated from the time when the usufruct was separated from the mere
ownership.

\34. *Julianus, Digest, Book VII*.

The same rule applies where land is added to other land by alluvion.

\35. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

And, on the other hand, if the plaintiff should bequeath the usufruct of
certain property, after issue has been joined, some authorities very
properly are of the opinion that no account of the profits should be
taken after the time when the usufruct was separated from the property.

\(1) Where I bring an action for land which does not belong to me, and
the judge states in his decision that it is mine, he should also render
judgment against the possessor for the profits; for he must be ordered
to deliver the profits by the same mistake, as the plaintiff should not
relinquish the profits for the benefit of the possessor, who has lost
the case; otherwise, as Mauricianus says, the judge cannot decide that
delivery must be made of the property; and why should the possessor hold
what he could not have held if he had relinquished possession at once?

\(2) A plaintiff who has accepted the estimate of property is not
compelled to secure the possessor against eviction; for the possessor
must blame himself if he did not surrender the property.

\(3) Where property cannot be divided without being ruined, it is
established that one can bring an action for a share of the same.

\36. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

When a person institutes proceedings in an action for recovery, in order
that he may not do so in vain, he ought to inquire whether the defendant
against whom he brings the action, is the possessor or has fraudulently
relinquished possession.

\(1) A party who is sued *in rem*, may also have judgment rendered
against him on the ground of negligence; and the possessor of a slave
against whom an action has been brought for his recovery, is guilty of
negligence if he permits him to appear in the arena, and he is killed;
and also where the slave was a fugitive, and he did not secure him, and
he escaped; or where suit is brought for a vessel, and he dispatched it
in bad weather, and it was lost by shipwreck.

37. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVII*.

Julianus says in the Eighth Book of the Digest, that if I build on the
land of another of which I am the *bona-fide* purchaser, but do so at a
time when I knew that the land belonged to another, we should see
whether I am not entitled to an exception; unless someone may say that I
am entitled to an exception on the ground that I anticipated a loss. I
think, however, that such a party has no right to an exception; for, as
soon as he was certain that the land belonged to another he should not
have erected the building; but permission should be granted him to
remove the building which he erected, if he does so without loss to the
owner of the land.

38. *Celsus, Digest, Book III*.

Upon the land of another, which you purchased without investigation, you
built or planted, and you were then evicted. In this instance, a good
judge will decide in different ways in accordance with the legal
condition of the parties, and the circumstances of the case. Suppose the
owner to have done the same thing, then, in order to recover his land,
he must reimburse you for your expenses, but only to the amount by which
it is rendered more valuable; and if what was added to it amounts to
more than the purchase-money, he will be required to pay only what was
expended. Suppose that the party is poor, and if he is compelled to pay
this he must sacrifice his household goods and the tombs of his
ancestors; it will then be sufficient for you to be permitted to remove
as much as you can of what you have built, provided that the land will
not be rendered worse than it would have been if no building had been
erected upon it in the first place. We, however, decided that if the
owner is ready to pay you a sum equal to what the possessor would have
had if these things were removed, he shall have power to do so. But you
are not to be permitted to act maliciously, as, for instance, to scrape
off plaster which you have put on, or to deface paintings, which would
have no effect except to cause annoyance. Suppose that the owner is a
party who expects to sell the property as soon as he recovers it; then,
unless he delivers the amount which we have already stated he must
deliver in the first example, the damages for which judgment has been
rendered against you must be paid after this is deducted.

\39. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVII*.

Contractors who build with their own materials immediately transfer the
ownership of the same to those who own the land on which they erect the
building.

\(1) Julianus very properly says in the Twelfth Book of the Digest, that
a woman who gives land in pledge as security for the debt of another,
can recover the same by an action *in rem*, even though the land has
been sold by the creditor:

\40. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Because the creditor is held to have sold a pledge which was void.

\41. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVII*.

Where anyone buys property under the condition that if some other party
offers more, he will relinquish the purchase, as soon as the condition
is fulfilled he can no longer avail himself of an action *in rem;* but
where land has been transferred to a party under such a condition, he
can make use of an action *in rem* to recover it before an increased
price is offered, but he cannot do so afterwards.

\(1) Where a slave or the son of a family sells and delivers a tract of
land to me, I am entitled to an action *in rem* to recover the same, if
he had the free administration of his *peculium*. The same rule applies
where a slave delivers the property of his master with the consent of
the latter; just as where an agent makes a sale of, or delivers,
property with the consent of his principal, I will be entitled to an
action *in rem*.

\42. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXVI*.

Where a suit *in rem* is brought, the heir of the possessor  if he
himself is not in possession  will be released; still, if any personal
liability of the deceased has been incurred, this must, by all means, be
included in the judgment.

\43. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXVII*.

Whatever is attached to religious objects is itself religious; and
therefore stones which have formed part of a religious structure cannot
be recovered, even after they have been removed; the plaintiff, however,
will be entitled to extraordinary relief by an action *in factum*, and
he who removed the stones will be compelled to restore them. But where,
stones belonging to another have been employed for building a monument
without the consent of the owner, and before the monument has been used
they are detached and removed to be employed elsewhere, they can be
recovered by the owner. And even if they have been removed to be
replaced in the same structure, it is established that the owner of the
same can, in like manner, recover them.

\44. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXIX*.

Fruit hanging on a tree is considered to be part of the soil. 

\45. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXVIII*.

Where a slave is restored to the plaintiff after an action has been
brought for his recovery, and this was done by a *bona-fide* possessor,
I think that he should give security against malice alone, but other
possessors should give security against negligence as well; and a
*bona-fide *possessor must be included among them, after issue has been
joined.

\46. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X*.

Where property for which suit is brought by an action *in rem* is
estimated at the amount that the plaintiff makes oath to in court, the
ownership of the same at once passes to the possessor; for I am con-

sidered to have compromised and arranged the matter with him, on the
basis which he himself established.

\47. *The Same, On Plautius, Book XVII*.

This is the case where the property is at hand, if it is elsewhere, it
passes, when the possessor obtains it by the consent of the plaintiff;
and therefore it is not contrary to the rule that the estimate of the
judge should only be made where the plaintiff gives security, "that
nothing will be done by him to prevent possession of the property being
delivered".

\48. *Papinianus, Opinions, Book II*.

Where expenses have been incurred by a *bona-fide* possessor with
reference to a tract of land which it is apparent belongs to another; he
cannot bring an action to recover said expenses from anyone who
presented him with the land, or from the owner of the same; but, through
the aid of an exception on the ground of fraud, he can be reimbursed for
said expenses, by order of Court, on equitable considerations; that is
to say, where the expenses exceed the amount of the profits collected
before issue was joined, for where a set-off is permitted, the owner
will be required to return the amount to which the expenses exceed the
profits, if the land has been benefited.

\49. *Celsus, Digest, Book XVIII*.

I am of the opinion that the land on which a house stands is a portion
of the same; and not merely a support, as the sea is to ships.

\(1) Whatever remains of my property, which I have the right to recover
at law is mine.

\50. *Callistratus, Monitory Edict, Book II*.

Where a field belongs to anyone by the right of purchase, proceedings
cannot properly be instituted by an action of this kind before the field
has been delivered, and possession of the same lost.

\(1) An heir may properly bring suit for what is due to the estate, even
though he may not yet have obtained possession of it.

\51. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVI*.

Where an action *in rem* is brought and a decision is rendered against
the heir of the possessor, the negligence and fraud of the heir in the
matter must be taken into consideration in rendering judgment.

\52. *Julianus, Digest, Book LV*.

Where the possessor of a tract of land fraudulently relinquished
possession of the same before issue was joined, his heirs cannot be
compelled to undertake the defence of the action *in rem;* but an action
*in factum* should be granted against them by which they may be forced
to surrender the amount to which they have profited by means of the
property.

\53. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXXI*.

Where the possessor of land has cultivated or planted it, and the land
is subsequently recovered by a suit, he cannot remove what he planted.

\54. *Ulpianus, Opinions, Book VI*.

There is a great difference between the duties of an advocate and the
defence of one's own case; and where a party subsequently ascertains
that certain property belongs to him, he will not lose his ownership of
the same, because, while ignorant of the fact, he aided another who was
bringing suit to recover it.

\55. *Julianus, Digest, Book LV*.

Where the possessor of land dies before issue is joined, leaving two
heirs, and an action to recover the entire estate is brought against one
of them, who was in possession, there is no doubt that judgment must be
rendered against him for all of it.

\56. *The Same, Digest, Book LXXVIII*.

*A* suit for the recovery of a *peculium* will not be allowed, as it is
in the case of a flock; but a party to whom a *peculium* was bequeathed
must bring an action for the separate articles composing the same.

\57. *Alfenus, Digest, Book VI*.

A party against whom a suit was brought for the recovery of land, was
again sued by another for the same land; and the question arose if he
should deliver the land to either of the plaintiffs by order of court,
and afterwards judgment should be rendered in favor of the other
plaintiff, how would he avoid sustaining a double loss? I answered that
whichever judge decided the case first must order the land to be
delivered to the plaintiff under the condition that he would execute a
bond or give security to the possessor that if the other party recovered
the land, he would deliver the same.

\58. *Paulus, Epitomes of The Digest of Alfenus, Book HI*.

Where a man was sued for the recovery of a slave and also for a theft
committed by the said slave; the question arose what it would be
necessary for him to do if judgment was rendered against him in both
cases, if the slave was recovered from him in the first place? The '
answer was that the judge should not compel him to deliver the slave,
unless security was previously furnished that where any damages were
paid by him he should be fully reimbursed for them, because he had
joined issue in a case involving the same slave. Where, however,
judgment was first rendered in the case involving the theft, and he
surrendered the slave by way of indemnity, and then another judgment was
rendered in favor of the plaintiff in the action for the recovery of the
slave; the judge should not make an estimate of damages because the
slave was not surrendered, since no negligence or malice could be
attributed to the party in failing to deliver the slave.

\59. *Julianus, On Minicius, Book VI*.

A man living in a house belonging to another placed windows and doors
therein, and these the owner of the building removed after a year had
elapsed. I ask whether the party who put them there can bring an action
for the recovery of those doors and windows? The answer was that he can,
for whatever is attached to the building of another forms a part of the
same as long as it continues so, but as soon as it is removed, it
immediately reverts to its former condition.

\60. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXIX*.

Where a possessor who is a child or an insane person destroys or spoils
anything, he cannot be punished.

\61. *Julianus, On Minicius, Book VI*.

Minicius, where a man had used materials belonging to another to repair
his own ship, having been asked whether the ship would still remain the
property of the same man, answered that it would; but if he did this
while building the ship, it would not be the case. Julianus states in a
note that the property in the entire ship follows the position of the
keel.

\62. *Papinianus, Questions, Book VI*.

Where suit is brought for a ship against a possessor in bad faith, an
estimate of the profits must be made, just as in the case of shops and
ground which is ordinarily leased. This is not contrary to the rule that
an heir is not forced to pay interest upon money which has been
deposited but which he does not handle; for although it is true that
freight, like interest, is not derived from nature but is collectible by
law; still, freight can be demanded in this instance, because the
possessor of the ship is not required to be liable to the plaintiff for
risk, but money is loaned at interest at the risk of the lender.

\(1) Generally speaking, however, where a question arises concerning the
estimation of profits, it is established that it must be considered, not
whether the possessor in bad faith has enjoyed them, but whether the
plaintiff would have been able to enjoy them, if he had been permitted
to be in possession of the property. Julianus also adopted this opinion.

\63. *The Same, Questions, Book XII*.

Where anyone loses possession through negligence, but not on account of
fraud, since he must allow an estimate to be made, he will be entitled
to be heard by the court, if he asks that his adversary should be
ordered to assign his right of action; and as the prætor will grant him
aid at any time where some one else is in possession, he will not be
taken advantage of in any way. He should be granted relief, even if the
party who received the sum assessed is in possession; and the latter
will not readily be heard if he desires to refund the money after he has
once received it under the decision of the judge at the risk of the
defendant.

\64. *The Same, Questions, Book XX*.

When an action *in rem* is brought, it is certain that the profits must
be delivered even with reference to those things which are merely kept
for use and not for enjoyment.

\65. *The Same, Opinions, Book II*.

If anyone who purchased land from someone who was not its owner
interposes an exception on the ground of fraud, he will not be required
to surrender the land to the owner, unless the money which was paid to a
creditor who held the land in pledge for debts, together with the
interest for the intermediate time is recovered by him, that is,
provided the interest amounts to more than the profits which he
recovered before the suit was brought, for they can only be set off
against interest recently due on the principal; since it is only just
that expenses should be allowed as in the case of improvements of land.

\(1) Where a man gave his daughter, who was a female slave, not by way
of dowry but as a portion of her *peculium;* then, if he does not
bequeath her anything as *peculium*, the slave must be included among
the assets of the estate. Where, however, a father disinherited his
daughter in consideration of her dowry and *peculium;* and for that
reason either left her nothing by his will, or left her that much less;
a defence based upon the intention of her father will protect the
daughter.

\66. *Paulus, Questions, Book II*.

We have no less right to bring suit to recover something which is our
own, because it is expected that we will lose the ownership of the same,
if the condition upon which a legacy or a grant of freedom depends
should be complied with.

\67. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I*.

A man who bought a house from the guardian of a minor sent a carpenter
to repair it, and he found some money therein. The question arises to
whom does that money belong? I answered that if it was not money
concealed, but some which had been lost, or which the party to whom it
belonged had by mistake failed to remove, it should, nevertheless,
continue to be his to whom it originally belonged.

\68. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LI*.

Where a person is ordered to surrender property and does not obey the
order of court, stating that he is unable to do so; if, indeed, he has
the property, possession shall be forcibly transferred from him on
application to the judge, and the only decision to be rendered in the
matter is with reference to the profits.

If, however, he is unable to deliver the property, and has acted
fraudulently to avoid doing so, he must be ordered to pay as much as his
adversary swears to, without any limitation; but where he is unable to
deliver the property, and did not act fraudulently to avoid doing so, he
can be ordered to pay no more than what it is worth; that

is to say, the amount of the interest of his adversary. This is the
general principle, and applies to all matters where property is to be
delivered by order of court, whether interdicts or actions *in rem* or
*in personam* are involved.

\69. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XIII*.

Where a person has acted fraudulently in order to avoid being in
possession, he can be punished in this manner, namely: the plaintiff
shall not be required to give him security that he will assign to him
the rights of action which he has in the case:

\70. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXIX*.

And it is settled that he cannot even be granted a Publician Action,
lest he may be able to obtain property by violence and against the will
of the owner, by the payment of a fair price.

\71. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XIII*.

Where a possessor has fraudulently relinquished possession, but the
plaintiff is unwilling to make oath, and prefers that his adversary
should be ordered to pay the real value of the property, his desire
should be granted.

\72. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

If you purchased the land of Sempronius from Titius, and after the price
has been paid it is delivered to you, and then Titius becomes the heir
of Sempronius, and sells and delivers the same land to another party, it
is just that you should be preferred; for even if the vendor himself
should bring suit against you to recover the property, you can bar him
by an exception; but if he himself was in possession, and you should
bring an action against him, you could make use of a replication against
an exception on the ground of ownership.

\73. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XVII*.

In an action brought to recover some specific property the possessor is
not compelled to state what share of it belongs to him, for this is the
duty of the plaintiff, and not of the possessor. The same rule is
observed in the Publician Action.

\(1) To a superficiary,

\74. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

(That is to say, one who has a right to occupy the surface of ground
belonging to another, on the condition of paying a certain rent for it),

\75. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

The prætor promises an action *in rem* where proper cause is shown.

\76. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

The principles have been stated with reference to a suit for recovery of
the entire property must be understood to equally apply to the recovery
of a portion of the same; and it is the duty of the judge to

order those things which should be given up to be also delivered in
proportion, at the same time that the share itself is surrendered.

\(1) An action for the recovery of a share which is not yet ascertained
will be granted, if there is good cause for it. It is good cause where,
for instance, the *Lex Falcidia* is applicable in the case of a will, on
account of the uncertain sum which is to be reserved from legacies, when
thorough investigation has not been made by the Court. Where a legatee
to whom a slave has been bequeathed is entirely ignorant of what share
in said slave he should bring suit for; an action of this kind will be
granted. We understand that the same rule applies to other matters.

\77. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVII*.

A certain woman gave a tract of land by a letter to a man who was not
her husband, and then rented the same land from him. It might be
maintained that he had a right to an action *in rem*, since he had
acquired possession through her, just as through a tenant. It was stated
that he had indeed been on the land which was donated to him when the
letter was sent; and this was sufficient to constitute delivery of
possession, even though the renting of the ground had not taken place.

\78. *Labeo, Epitomes of Probabilities by Paulus, Book IV*.

If you have not harvested the crops on a tract of land belonging to
another of which you are merely in possession, you are not obliged to
deliver anything produced by said land.

Paulus, on the other hand, asks whether the crops become the property of
the possessor because he gathered them on his own account? We must
understand the harvesting of crops to mean not only where they are
entirely gathered, but where this has begun and has proceeded to the
extent that the crops have ceased to be supported by the land; as, for
instance, where olives or grapes have been gathered, but no wine or oil
has been made by anyone; for in this case, he who has gathered the crops
is considered, from that time, to have obtained them.

\79. *The Same, Epitomes of Probabilities by Paulus, Book VI*.

If you bring suit against me to recover a slave, and he dies after issue
is joined, the profits must be estimated during the time that he lived.
Paulus says, "I think that this is true only where the slave had not yet
become so ill as to render his services worthless; for even if he had
continued to live in that state of ill health, it would not be proper
for the profits to be estimated during that time".

\80. *Furius Anthiannus, On the Edict, Book I*.

We are not compelled to endure an action *in rem*, because anyone is
allowed to allege that he is not in possession, so that if his adversary
can prove that the other party is actually in possession of the
property, he can have the possession transferred to himself by an order
of court; even though he does not prove that the property is his.

TITLE II. CONCERNING THE PUBLICIAN ACTION IN REM.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

The prætor says: "Where anyone desires to institute proceedings to
recover property delivered to him for good reason, and the title to
which has not yet passed by usucaption, I will grant him an action."

\(1) The prætor says, and very properly, "Where the title has not yet
passed by usucaption"; for, if this has once taken place, he has a right
to a civil action and does not require an honorary one.

\(2) But why did he merely mention delivery and usucaption, when there
are numerous provisions of the law by means of which anyone may obtain
ownership, as, for instance, in case of a bequest?

\2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX*.

Or donations made *mortis causal* For the Publician Action can be
brought where possession has been lost, because it is obtained in the
same way as a legacy.

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

And there are many other provisions of the law to the same effect.

\(1) The prætor says: "He may bring suit for a good reason"; and not
only is the Publician Action available by a purchaser in good faith, but
also by others; as for instance, by one to whom property has been
transferred by way of dowry, and which has not yet been acquired by
*usucaption;* for a very good cause of action exists whether the
property given by way of dowry was appraised or not. Likewise, where
property is transferred on account of a judgment:

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX*. Or for the purpose of paying a
debt,

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Or for the surrender of a slave in lieu of damages, whether there was
good ground for this, or not.

\6. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX*.

Moreover, in a noxal action, where no defence was made, I can remove the
slave by order of the prætor and if, after removing him, I lose
possession of him, I can avail myself of the Publician Action.

\7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

But if the property has been adjudged to me, I can bring the Publician
Action.

\(1) Where the value of the property is estimated in court it resembles
a slave; and Julianus says in the Twenty-second Book of the Digest that,
if the defendant tenders the amount of the appraisement, the Publician
Action will lie.

\(2) Marcellus, in the Twenty-seventh Book of the Digest, says that
where anyone purchases property from a person who is insane, being
ignorant that this was the case, he can acquire it by usucaption; and
therefore he will have a right to the Publician Action.

\(3) Where anyone obtains property as a gift, he is entitled to the
Publician Action; which also will lie against a donor; for the plaintiff
is a lawful possessor where he accepts a donation.

\(4) Where a party purchases property from a minor, being ignorant that
he is such, he has a right to the Publician Action.

\(5) Also where an exchange has been made, the same action will lie.

\(6) The Publician Action is not based on the question of possession,
but upon that of ownership.

\(7) If you tender me an oath in a suit which I have brought for the
recovery of property, and I swear that the said property is mine, I am
entitled to the Publician Action, but only against you; for the only
person who can be prejudiced by the oath is the party who tendered it.
If, however, the oath is tendered to the possessor, and he swears that
the property does not belong to the plaintiff, he can make use of an
exception only against the latter; for it does not operate to the extent
of granting him a right of action.

\(8) In the Publician Action, all those rules must be observed which we
have mentioned in the action for the recovery of property.

\(9) This action lies in favor of an heir as well as of prætorian
successors.

\(10) If I do not make a purchase, but my slave does, I am entitled to
the Publician Action. The same rule applies where my agent, guardian,
curator, or anyone else transacting my business makes a purchase.

\(11) The prætor says: "Who purchases in good faith"; therefore, it is
not every purchase which can profit by the action, but only one made in
good faith; hence it is enough if I am a purchaser in good faith even if
I should not buy from the owner, although he may have made the sale to
me with fraudulent intent; for the fraud of a vendor will not prejudice
me.

\(12) In this action it will be of no disadvantage to me if I am the
successor of the purchaser, and acted fraudulently, where the party
himself whom I succeeded made the purchase in good faith; and it will
not profit me if I was not guilty of fraud, where the purchaser whom I
succeeded was guilty of fraud.

\(13) If, however, my slave made the purchase, his fraud, and not mine,
must be considered; and *vice versa*.

\(14) The Publician Action has reference to the time of the purchase,
and therefore it is held by Pomponius that nothing which was
fraudulently done, either before or after the purchase was made, can
become the subject of investigation in this action.

\(15) This action has reference to the good faith of the purchaser
alone.

\(16) Therefore, in order for the Publician Action to be available, the
following conditions must exist: the person who made the purchase must
have acted in good faith, and the property purchased must have been
delivered to him with that understanding. But even if he made the
purchase in good faith, he cannot make use of the Publician Action
before delivery.

\(17) Julianus stated in the Seventh Book of the Digest, that the
delivery of the property purchased must be made in good faith; and
therefore if the party knowingly fakes possession of something that
belongs to another, he cannot avail himself of the Publician Action,
because he will not be able to acquire the property by usucaption. Nor
must anyone think that it is our opinion that it is sufficient for the
purchaser to be ignorant that the property belonged to another at the
commencement of delivery, in order to enable him to make use of the
Publician Action, but it is necessary that he should be a *bona-fide*
purchaser at that time also.

\8. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Nothing, however, is stated with reference to the payment of the
purchase-money; wherefore it must be conjectured that it is not the
opinion of the prætor that it should be asked whether the price has been
paid or not.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

The Publician Action is equally available whether the property is
delivered to the purchaser or to his heir.

\(1) Where a party purchases property which has been deposited with him,
or loaned or pledged to him, it must be considered as having been
delivered, if it remains in his possession after the purchase.

\(2) The same rule will apply where the delivery preceded the purchase.

\(3) Moreover, if I purchase an estate, and certain property belonging
to it has been delivered to me for which I wish to bring suit, Neratius
states that I will be entitled to the Publician Action.

\(4) Where anyone sells the same property separately to two *bona-fide
*purchasers, let us see which of them has the better right to the
Publician Action; he to whom the property was first delivered, or he who
merely bought it? Julianus, in the Seventh Book of the Digest, states:
"That if the parties made the purchase from the same person who was not
the owner, he will be preferred to whom delivery was made first; but if
they buy said property from different persons who were not the owners,
the one in possession is in a better legal position than the one who
brings the action; and this opinion is correct."

\(5) This action is not available with reference to property which
cannot be acquired by usucaption; as, for instance, in the case of
articles that had been stolen, or fugitive slaves.

\(6) Where a slave belonging to an estate purchases property before the
estate has been entered upon, and after delivery loses possession of the
same; the heir, very properly, has a right to the Publician Action, just
as if he himself had been in possession.

The members of a municipality also, where property has been delivered to
their slave, will be in the same position;

\10. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX*.

Whether the slave purchased said property with reference to his own
*peculium*, or not.

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Where I have made a purchase, and the property has been delivered to
another party at my request, the Emperor Severus stated in a Rescript
that the Publician Action should be granted him.

\(1) The Publician Action is granted where suit is brought for the
recovery of an usufruct which has been delivered, and also where
servitudes of urban estates have been created by delivery, or by
sufferance; for instance, where a party allowed an aqueduct to be built
through his house. The same rule applies in the case of rustic
servitudes, for it is established that in this case delivery and
sufferance protect them.

\(2) The offspring of a stolen female slave that was conceived while she
was in possession of a *bona-fide* purchaser, can be recovered by means
of this action; even if the child was not in possession of the party who
purchased it; but the heir of the thief is not entitled to this action,
because he is the successor to the defective title of the deceased.

\(3) Sometimes, however, even though the mother who was stolen had not
been sold, but was presented to me (I being ignorant of the fact) and
she afterwards conceived and brought forth while in my possession, I am
entitled to a Publician Action to recover the child, as Julianus says;
provided that, at the time I bring suit, I do not know that the mother
was stolen.

\(4) Julianus also states, in a general way, that no matter how I could
acquire the mother by usucaption, if she had not been stolen, I can
acquire the child in the same way, if I was ignorant that the mother had
been stolen. Therefore, in all these instances, I will be entitled to
the Publician Action.

\(5) The same rule applies in the case of the child of the daughter of a
female slave, even if it was not born, but after the death of its mother
was extracted from her womb by the Cæsarean operation; as Pomponius
stated in the Fortieth Book.

\(6) He also says that where a house has been purchased and is
destroyed, any additions made to it can be recovered by an action of
this description.

\(7) Where an accession is made to land by alluvial deposit, it becomes
of the same nature as that to which it is added; and therefore since the
land itself cannot be recovered by a Publician Action, the addition
cannot be either; but if it can, the portion added by alluvion may be
also recovered; and this was mentioned by Pomponius.

\(8) He also adds that, where an action is to be brought for parts of a
purchased statue which have been removed, a similar action is available.

\(9) He also states, that if I purchase a vacant lot and build a house
upon it, I can properly make use of the Publician Action.

\(10) He also says, if I build a house, and the lot afterwards becomes
vacant, I can likewise make use of the Publician Action.

\12. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX*.

Where a man presented a slave to his betrothed, and, before the title
passed by usucaption, received him back by way of dowry; it was stated
by the Divine Pius in a Rescript that if the parties were divorced, the
slave should be returned, for a gift between two betrothed persons is
valid; and therefore she, as the possessor, will be granted an
exception; and if possession should have been lost, the Publician Action
would be granted, whether a stranger or the donor was in possession of
the property.

\(1) Where an estate is delivered to anyone under the Trebellian Decree
of the Senate, even if the party should not obtain possession of the
same, he can make use of the Publician Action.

\(2) In the case of perpetual leases and other real property which can
not be acquires by usucaption, the Publician Action is available where a
*bona-fide* delivery of the land has been made.

\(3) The same rule applies where I purchased in good faith, from a
person who is not the owner, a house which carried with it the surface
of the land.

\(4) If the property is of such a nature that some law or constitution
forbids its alienation, in this instance the Publician Action will not
lie, because, under such circumstances, the prætor affords no protection
to anyone to prevent his breaking the law.

\(5) We can make use of the Publician Action even in the case of an
infant slave less than a year old.

\(6) Where anyone wishes to recover a portion of some property he can
avail himself of the Publician Action.

\(7) He also can properly employ this action who has had possession only
for a moment.

\13. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Wherever property is legally acquired by us in any way and is lost, this
action will be granted to us for the purpose of recovering said
property.

\(1) Sometimes, however, the Publician Action can not be brought by
persons who have lawfully obtained possession; for possession derived
from pledge and precarious gifts is lawful; but a right of action is not
usually allowed in cases of this kind, of course, for the reason that
neither the creditor nor the party who has a precarious title obtains
possession with the understanding that he shall believe himself to be
the owner.

\(2) When anyone makes a purchase from a minor, he must prove that he
did so with the consent of his guardian, and not in violation of law.
But where he made the purchase through the deceit of a pretended
guardian, he is held to have acted in good faith.

\14. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Papinianus states in the Sixth Book of Questions, that where a man
forbids delivery or gives notice, and the property has been sold by his
agent at his request, and the agent delivered it in spite of this; the
prætor will protect the purchaser, whether he is in possession, or
whether he brings an action to recover the property. But where the agent
is compelled to make payment to the purchaser on account of an action
based on purchase, the former can recover in a counter action on
mandate; for it might happen that the property could be recovered from
the purchaser by the party who gave the order to sell it, because
through ignorance he did not make use of the exception which he should
have pleaded, for instance: "If the party with whom I dealt did not make
the sale with your consent".

\15. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III*.

If my slave, while in flight, purchases property from some one who is
not the owner, the Publician Action will lie in my favor, even though I
may not have obtained possession, through him, of the property
delivered.

\16. *Papinianus, Questions, Book X*.

Paulus states in a note that an exception on the ground of legal
ownership may be pleaded in bar of the Publician Action.

\17. *Neratius, Parchments, Book HI*.

The Publician Action was not invented for the purpose of depriving the
real owner of his property (and this is proved in the first place on
equitable principles; and in the second place by the use of the
exception: "If the property in dispute does not belong to the
possessor"); but, for the reason that where a man purchases anything in
good faith and has obtained possession of it, he, rather than his
adversary, should be entitled to hold it.

TITLE III.

CONCERNING ACTIONS FOR THE RECOVERY OF LAND WHICH HAS BEEN PERPETUALLY
LEASED, NAMELY, EMPHYTEUTIC

LAND.

\1. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

Some lands belonging to towns are called "*vectigales*", and others are
not. Those are styled *vectigales* which are leased perpetually, that is
to say, under an agreement that so long as the rent is paid for them it
shall not be lawful to take them away from those who leased them, or
from their successors. Lands are not of this description which are
leased for cultivation under the terms by which we are accustomed to
rent them privately for that purpose.

\(1) Where parties lease land from municipalities in perpetuity,
although they do not become the owners of the same it is established

that they are, nevertheless, entitled to an action *in rem* against a
possessor, and even against the members of the municipality themselves:

\2. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XVII*. Provided, however, they always
pay the rent.

\3. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

The same rule applies where they have made a lease for a specified time,
and the term agreed upon has not yet expired.

* * * * *
