
THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK IX.


BOOK IX.
TITLE I.   CONCERNING THE COMMISSION OF DAMAGE BY A QUADRUPED.
TITLE II.  ON THE LEX AQUILIA.
TITLE III. CONCERNING THOSE WHO POUR ANYTHING OUT OK THROW ANYTHING DOWN, 3
TITLE IV.  CONCERNING NOXAL ACTIONS, 7


TITLE I. CONCERNING THE COMMISSION OF DAMAGE BY A QUADRUPED.

1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Where a quadruped is said to have committed damage, an action which has
come down from a Law of the Twelve Tables may be brought; which Law
prescribes that either whatever caused the damage must be given up, that
is, that the animal that committed it shall be surrendered, or an amount
of money equivalent to the damage shall be paid.

(1) The term "*noxia*" means the offence itself.

(2) This action has reference to every kind of quadruped.

(3) The pr√¶tor says "*pauperiem fecisse*", which signifies the damage
caused without wrong by the animal which commits it, for an animal
cannot be guilty of wrong in law, because it is deficient in reason.

(4) Therefore, as Servius states, this action is available where an
animal commits damage after its ferocity has been aroused; for example,
where a horse which has the habit of kicking, kicks, or an ox which is
accustomed to butt, does so; or a mule commits damage by reason of
extreme savageness. But if an animal should upset a load on anyone on
account of the inequality of the ground, or the negligence of the
driver, or because the animal was overloaded; this action will not lie,
but proceedings must be instituted for wrongful injury.

(5) Where, however, a dog, while he is being led by someone, breaks
away on account of his viciousness, and inflicts injury upon another;
then if he could have been held more securely by some one else, or if
the party should not have led him through that place, this action will
not lie, and the party who had charge of the dog will be liable.

(6) Moreover, this action will not lie if the savage animal causes any
damage through the instigation of another.

(7) And, generally speaking, this action can be brought whenever a
savage animal does any damage which is contrary to its nature, and,
therefore, if a horse irritated by pain, kicks, this action will not
lie; but the party who struck or wounded the horse will be liable rather
to an action *in factum*, than under the *Lex Aquilia*, for no other
reason than that the party did not commit the injury with his own body.
But where anyone caresses a horse, or pats him, and he is kicked by it,
there will be ground for this action.

(8) Where one animal provokes another and causes it to commit some
damage, the action must be brought with reference to the one that caused
the provocation.

(9) This action is available whether the animal committed the damage
with its own body or through something else with which it was

in contact; as for instance, where an ox bruises someone by means of a
wagon or by anything else that is upset.

(10) This action will not be available in the case of wild beasts, on
account of their natural ferocity; and therefore if a bear should escape
and commit damage, its former owner cannot be sued, because when the
animal escaped he ceased to be the owner; and therefore, even if I
should kill it, the carcass will be mine.

(11) Where two rams or two bulls fight and one kills the other, Quintus
Mucius makes a distinction; for he holds that the action will not lie if
the one that was the aggressor is killed, but if the one not guilty of
the provocation is killed, the action may be brought; and therefore the
owner must either pay the damage or surrender the animal in lieu
thereof.

(12) Also, in the case of quadrupeds, the offence follows the animal;
and this action can be brought against the party to whom the animal
belongs, and not against him to whom it belonged when it committed the
damage.

(13) It is evident that if the animal should die before issue is
joined, the right of action will be extinguished.

(14) To surrender the animal by way of reparation is to give it up
while it is alive. If it belongs to several parties, an action for
damages can be brought against them individually, just as in case of a
slave.

(15) Sometimes, however, the owner will not be sued to compel him to
give up the animal by way of reparation, but an action will be brought
against him for the entire amount; as for instance, where having been
asked in court whether the animal belongs to him he answers that it does
not, and if it should be proved that it was his, judgment shall be
rendered against him for the entire amount.

(16) If the animal should be killed by anyone after issue has been
joined, since an action will lie against the owner under the *Lex
Aquilia,*consideration of the *Lex Aquilia* will be taken in court,
because the owner has lost the power to surrender the animal by way of
reparation; and therefore, in the case which has been stated, he must
tender the estimated amount of damages, unless he is ready to assign his
right of action against him who killed the animal.

(17) There is no doubt whatever that this action will pass to an heir
and the other successor of the party injured; and also that it can be
brought against heirs and other successors, not by the right of
succession but on the ground of ownership.

2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

This action will lie, not only in favor of the owner of the damaged
property, but also in favor of any party in interest; as for instance,
of one to whom the property was loaned, and also of a fuller, because
those who are liable are held to have sustained damage.

(1) Where anyone who is trying to escape from another, for example,
from a magistrate, betakes himself to a neighboring shop and is bitten
there by a ferocious dog, certain authorities hold that he has
no right of action on account of the dog; but that he would have one if
the dog was loose.

3. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

There is no doubt that an action can be brought under this law in behalf
of persons who are free; as, for instance, where an animal wounds the
head of a family, or the son of a family, provided no account is taken
of disfigurement, since anyone who is free does not admit of
appraisement; but account may be taken of the expenses incurred for the
cure of the injury and of the loss of labor which the party could not
perform for the reason that he was disabled.

4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

An equitable action will be available under these circumstances where
the damage was committed, not by a quadruped but by some other animal.

5. *Alfenus, Digest, Book II*.

While a groom was leading a horse to the stable of an inn, the horse
sniffed at a mule, and the mule kicked and broke the groom's leg. An
opinion was requested whether suit could be brought against the owner of
the mule, on the ground that it had caused the injury, and I answered
that it could.

TITLE II. ON THE LEX AQUILIA.

1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

The *Lex Aquilia* annulled all laws previously enacted with reference to
the reparation of unlawful damage, whether these were the Twelve Tables
or any others; which laws it is not necessary to specify at present.

(1) The *Lex Aquilia* is a plebiscite; whose enactment Aquilius, a
tribune of the people, proposed to the populace.

2. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

It is provided by the first section of the *Lex Aquilia* that, "Where
anyone unlawfully kills a male or female slave belonging to another, or
a quadruped included in the class of cattle, let him be required to pay
a sum equal to the greatest value that the same was worth during the
past year".

(1) And then the law further provides that, "An action for double
damages may be brought against a person who makes a denial".

(2) It therefore appears that the law places in the same category with
slaves animals which are included under the head of cattle, and are kept
in herds, as, for instance, sheep, goats, oxen, horses, mules, and
asses. The question arises whether hogs are included under the
designation of cattle, and it is very properly decided by Labeo that
they are. Dogs, however, do not come under this head; and wild beasts
are

far from being included, as for instance, bears, lions, and panthers.
Elephants and camels are, as it were, mixed, for they perform the labor
of beasts of burden, and yet their nature is wild, and therefore they
must be included in the first Section.

3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Where a male or a female slave has been unlawfully killed, the *Lex
Aquilia* is applicable. It is added with reason that it must be
unlawfully killed, as it is not sufficient for it to be merely killed,
but this must be done in violation of law.

4. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

Therefore, if I kill your slave who is a thief and is attacking me at
the time, I shall be free from liability, "For natural reason permits a
man to protect himself from danger".

(1) The Law of the Twelve Tables permits anyone to kill a thief who is
caught at night, provided, however, that he gives warning by an outcry;
and it permits him to kill the thief in the day-time, if he is caught
and defends himself with a weapon, provided always, that he calls others
to witness with an outcry.

5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Where, however, anyone kills another who is attacking him with a weapon,
he is not held to have killed him unlawfully; and where anyone kills a
thief through fear of death, there is no doubt that he is not liable
under the *Lex Aquilia*. But if he is able to seize him, and prefers to
kill him, the better opinion is that he commits an unlawful act, and
therefore he will also be liable under the *Lex Cornelia*.

(1) We must here understand the term "injury" to mean not some insult,
as we do with reference to an action for injury, but something done
illegally, that is to say contrary to the law; for instance, where
anyone kills by negligence, and hence sometimes both actions can be
brought, namely, that under the *Lex Aquilia*, and that for injury; but,
in this case there will be two assessments, one for damage, and the
other for insult, consequently, we must here understand the term
"injury" to signify damage committed through negligence, even by a party
who did not intend to do wrong.

(2) Therefore we ask whether an action under the *Lex Aquilia* will lie
where an insane person causes damage? Pegasus denies that it will, for
how can anyone be negligent who is not in his right mind? This is
perfectly true. Hence an action under the *Lex Aquilia* will not lie;
just as where an animal causes the damage, or where a tile falls from a
roof.

Again, if a child causes any damage the same rule applies. If, however,
a boy who has not reached puberty causes it, Labeo says that he is
liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, because he would be liable for theft;
and I think this opinion is correct, if he is capable of committing a
breach of the law.

(3) Where a teacher wounds or kills a slave while instructing him, will
he be liable under the *Lex Aquilia* on the ground that he committed

unlawful damage? Julianus says that a person was held liable under the
*Lex Aquilia*, who blinded a pupil in one eye while instructing him; and
much more would he have been liable, if he had killed him. He supposes
the following case. A shoemaker, while teaching his trade to a boy who
was freeborn and the son of a family, and who did not properly perform
the task which he had given him, struck him on the neck with a last, and
the boy's eye was destroyed. Julianus says that, in this instance, an
action for injury will not lie because he inflicted the blow, not for
the purpose of causing him injury, but of warning and teaching him.
Still, he is in doubt as to whether an action on a contract will lie,
because only moderate punishment is conceded to a person who imparts
instruction. I do not doubt, however, that an action can be brought
under the *Lex Aquilia;*

6. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

As extreme severity on the part of an instructor is attributed to
negligence.

7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

By this action the father will obtain damages to the amount of the value
of the services of his son which he lost on account of the destruction
of his eye, as well as the expenses he incurred for his medical
treatment.

(1) We must understand the term "kill" to mean where this was done
either with a sword, a club, or some other weapon, or with the hands if
strangulation was used, or with a kick, or by striking him on the head,
or in any other way whatsoever.

(2) The *Lex Aquilia* will apply where anyone who has been too heavily
laden throws down his load and kills a slave; for it was in his power
not to be overloaded in this manner. Pegasus says that if anyone should
slip and crush with his load a slave belonging to another, he will be
liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, if he loaded himself more heavily than
he should have done, or walked carelessly over a slippery place.

(3) In like manner, where anyone injures another because of someone
pushing him, Proculus holds that neither he who gave the push is liable,
because he did not kill him, nor he who was pushed either, because he
did not commit wrongful injury; according to which opinion an action *in
factum*should be granted against the party who gave the push.

(4) Where anyone in a wrestling match or in a wrestling and boxing
contest or where two boxers are engaged, kills another; and he does so
in a public exhibition, the *Lex Aquilia* will not apply, because the
damage must be considered to have been committed for the sake of renown
and courage, and not with the intent to cause injury. This, however, is
not applicable to the case of a slave, since freeborn persons are
accustomed to take part in such contests, but it does apply where the
son of a family is wounded. It is evident that if one party inflicts a
wound while the other was retiring, the *Lex Aquilia* will be
applicable; or if he kills a slave where there is no contest, unless
this is done

at the instigation of the master; for then the *Lex Aquilia* will not
apply.

(5) Where anyone lightly strikes a slave who is sick, and he dies;
Labeo justly holds that he will be liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, for a
blow that is mortal to one man, often will not be so to another.

(6) Celsus says that it makes a great deal of difference whether the
party actually kills, or provides the cause of death, as he who provides
the cause of death is not liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, but is to an
action *in factum*. With reference to this, he cites the case of a party
who administered poison as medicine, and who he says provided the cause
of death; just as one who places a sword in the hands of an insane
person, for the latter would not be liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, but
would be to an action *in factum*.

(7) But where anyone throws another from a bridge, whether he is killed
by the blow which he received, or is submerged and drowned, or, overcome
by the force of the current, dies exhausted; the culprit, Celsus says,
is liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, just as if he had dashed a boy
against a rock.

Proculus holds that if a physician should operate upon a slave
unskillfully, an action will lie either on the contract, or under the
*Lex Aquilia*.

8. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

The same rule is applicable where he wrongfully makes use of a drug; but
if a surgeon operates properly, and does not employ any further curative
measures, he will not be free from responsibility, but is considered to
be guilty of negligence.

(1) Moreover, where a muleteer, through want of skill, is unable to
restrain the course of his mules, and they crush a slave belonging to
another, it is ordinarily said that the driver is liable on account of
negligence. The same view is held if he cannot control his mules because
of want of strength; nor does it seem to be unjust that want of strength
should furnish ground for negligence, because no one ought to undertake
anything which he knows, or ought to know, will be dangerous to others
on account of his weakness.

The law is the same in the case of a person who, through want of skill
or want of strength, cannot manage the horse on which he is riding.

9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Moreover, where a midwife administers a drug to a woman and she dies in
consequence, Labeo makes a distinction, namely: that if she administered
it with her own hands she is held to have killed the woman, but if she
gave it to the latter in order that she might take it, an action *in
factum* should be granted, and this opinion is correct; for she rather
provided the cause of death, than actually killed the woman.

(1) Where anyone, either by force of persuasion, administers a drug to
another, either by the mouth, or by injection, or anoints him with some
poisonous substance; he will be liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, just as
the midwife who administers a drug is liable.

(2) Where anyone kills a slave by starvation, Neratius *says* he is
liable to an action *in factum*.

(3) If my slave is riding on horseback, and by frightening the horse
you cause the slave to be thrown into a river, and he loses his life in
consequence, Ofilius writes that an action *in factiim* should be
granted; just as if my slave had been drawn into ambush by one man and
killed by another.

(4) Again, where a slave is killed by parties who are practicing with
javelins for amusement, the *Lex Aquilia* is applicable; but where
others are practicing with javelins, and a slave crosses the place the
*Lex Aquilia*will not apply, because he should not have rashly crossed
the field where this practice was going on; but still, if anyone
intentionally casts a javelin at him, he will be liable under the *Lex
Aquilia*.

10. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

For a dangerous game should be classed as an act of negligence,

11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book VIII*.

Mela also says that if, while several persons are playing ball, the ball
having been struck too violently should fall upon the hand of a barber
who is shaving a slave at the time, in such a way that the throat of the
latter is cut by the razor; the party responsible for negligence is
liable under the *Lex Aquilia*. Proculus thinks that the barber is to
blame; and, indeed, if he had the habit of shaving persons in a place
where it is customary to play ball, or where there was much travel, he
is in a certain degree responsible; although it may not improperly be
held that where anyone seats himself in a barber's chair in a dangerous
place, he has only himself to blame.

(1) Where one party holds a slave and another kills him, the party who
held him is liable to an action *in factum*, since he provided the cause
of death.

(2) But where several persons struck the slave, let us consider whether
all of them will be liable, just as if they had all killed him? And, if
it is known by whose blow he lost his life, the former will be liable
for having killed him; but if this is not known, Julianus says all of
them can be held liable for his death, and if proceedings are instituted
against only one, the others cannot be discharged; for under the *Lex
Aquilia*, where one man pays he does not release another, as the action
is a penal one.

(3) Celsus states that where anyone strikes a slave a mortal blow, and
another deprives him of life, the former will not be held liable for
having killed him, but only for having wounded him, for the reason that
he died from a wound inflicted by another, but the latter will be liable
because he killed him; and this opinion is held by Marcellus, and is the
more reasonable one.

(4) It was decided by the ancient authorities that where several
persons throw down a beam which crushes a slave, all are equally liable
to an action under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(5) Proculus also gave it as his opinion that a party who provoked a
dog, and caused him to bite some one, would be liable to an action under
the *Lex Aquilia*, even though he did not have hold of the dog.
Julianus, however, says that, in this instance, he is liable under the
*Lex Aquilia*only if he held the dog, and caused him to bite the other
party; but if he did not hold him, an action *in factum* should be
brought against him.

(6) An action under the *Lex Aquilia* can be brought by the master,
that is, by the owner.

(7) Where wrongful damage is done to a slave that I was about to return
to you on delivery of the price, Julianus says that I have a right to an
action under the *Lex Aquilia*, and that when I begin to return the
slave I must assign it to you.

(8) But if the slave is serving in good faith some person who is not
his owner, will the latter have a right of action under the *Lex
Aquilia*? The better opinion is that an action *in factum* should be
granted.

(9) Julianus says that where clothing is loaned to anyone and it is
torn, the latter cannot bring an action under the *Lex Aquilia*, but the
owner of the clothing can do so.

(10) Julianus discussed the point whether an usufructuary or a party
entitled to the use of property has a right of action under the *Lex
Aquilia?*I think the better opinion is that in a case of this kind, a
pr√¶torian action should be granted.

12. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X*.

Where the mere owner of property wounds or kills a slave in whom I have
the usufruct, an action should be granted me, as under the *Lex
Aquilia,*for damages in proportion to the amount of my usufruct; and
that portion of the year which elapsed previous to my usufruct must also
be included in the assessment of said damages.

13. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

A freeman is entitled to a pr√¶torian action, based on the *Lex Aquilia*,
in his own name; but he cannot bring the direct action, because no one
can be held to be the owner of his own limbs. A master, however, can
bring an action on account of a fugitive slave.

(1) Julianus says that if a freeman serves me in good faith as a slave,
he himself is liable to me under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(2) Where a slave belonging to an estate is killed, the question arises
who can bring suit under the *Lex Aquilia*, since there is no owner of
said slave? Celsus says, that it is the intention of the law that all
damages should be made good to the owner, and therefore the estate will
be considered the owner; hence when the estate is entered upon, the heir
can institute proceedings.

(3) Where a slave who was bequeathed is killed after the estate has
been entered upon, the right of action under the *Lex Aquilia* belongs
to the legatee, unless he did not accept the legacy until after the

death of the slave; because if he rejected it, Julianus says that the
result will be that the right of action must be said to belong to the
heir.

14. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

But where the heir himself kills the slave, it has been established that
an action against him must be granted to the legatee.

15. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

In consequence of what was written it must be stated that, if the slave
who was bequeathed is killed before the estate is entered upon, the
right of action under the *Lex Aquilia* must remain with the heir, on
account of having been acquired through the estate. If, however, the
slave was wounded before the estate was entered upon, then, in fact, the
right of action remained as a portion of the assets of the estate, but
the heir is obliged to assign it to the legatee.

(1) Where a slave is mortally wounded and afterwards loses his life
through the fall of a building, or through shipwreck, or through some
blow, sooner than he otherwise would have done; an action cannot be
brought on the ground of his death, but only for wounding him. If,
however, he was manumitted or sold, and afterwards died of the wound,
Julianus says an action can be brought as for having killed him. This
difference exists because he was killed by you at the time you wounded
him, although this only became apparent when he died; but in the former
instances the fall of the building did not permit it to appear whether
he was killed or not. Where a slave is mortally wounded and you order
him to be free, and appoint him your heir, and he then dies, his heir
cannot bring suit under the *Lex Aquilia*,

16. *Marcianus, Rules, Book IV*.

Because the affair has come to such a pass that the right to bring suit
could not have originally existed.

17. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Where an owner kills his own slave, he will be liable to an action *in
factum* brought by a *bona-fide* possessor or a party who held the slave
in pledge.

(1) (If Stichus has been bequeathed to two persons conjointly, and
having been killed is rejected by one of the legatees; I think that one
legatee alone can bring suit under the *Lex Aquilia*, because the
ownership seems to have vested in him by retroactive effect.)

18. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X*.

Where, however, a party who has received a slave in pledge kills or
wounds him, suit can be brought against him under the *Lex Aquilia* and
also on the pledge, but the plaintiff must be content with one or other
of these actions.

19. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

But where anyone kills a slave held in common he is liable under the
*Lex Aquilia*, so Celsus says; and the same rule applies if he wounds
him:

20. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLII*.

That is, with reference to the share for which he brings suit as
plaintiff.

21. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

The law says: "The greatest value of the slave during that past year".
This clause refers to an assessment of the amount of the damage which
was inflicted.

(1) The year is to be calculated back from the day on which the slave
was killed; but if he was only mortally wounded and died after a long
interval had elapsed, then, according to Julianus, we must compute the
year from the day on which he was wounded; although Celsus holds a
different opinion.

(2) Must we, however, only appraise the value of the body of the slave
when he was killed, or shall we not rather estimate what our interest
was in his not being killed? The present rule is that an estimate shall
be made of what our interest was worth.

22. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

Hence if you have killed a slave whom I had contracted to deliver to
some party under a penalty, the benefit to be derived by me must be
considered in the hearing of the case.

(1) The personal qualities of the slave must also be taken into
consideration in making the estimate, as for instance, where someone
kills a slave who belonged to a troop of actors or singers; or one of
twins; or one of a team of four horses; or the male or female of a pair
of mules; for, under such circumstances, not only should an estimate be
made of the value of the animal that is destroyed, but the depreciation
of those that remain must also be taken into account.

23. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Hence Neratius states that if a slave who has been appointed an heir is
killed, the value of the estate must also be taken into consideration.

(1) Julianus says that if a slave who had been liberated and appointed
heir is killed, neither the substituted heir nor the heir at law can
recover the appraised value of the estate by an action under the *Lex
Aquilia*, as the slave had not yet obtained it; and this opinion is
correct. Therefore, the sole estimate which can be made is that of the
value of the slave, since this is held to be the only thing in which the
substitute is interested; but I think that even the estimate of his
value should not be made, because if he had been the heir he would also
have been free.

(2) Julianus further says that if I am appointed an heir under the
condition that I will manumit Stichus, and Stichus is killed after the
death of the testator, the appraised amount that I will be entitled to
will likewise include the value of the estate; for the condition was not
fulfilled on account of the death of the slave; but if the slave was
killed during the lifetime of the testator, the estimated value of the
estate

cannot be considered, because the greatest value of the slave during the
preceding year was retroactively taken into account.

(3) Julianus also says that the appraisement of the value of the slave
who was killed can only be made with reference to the time when he was
worth the most during that year; and, therefore, if the thumb of a
valuable artist was cut off, and within a year of the time when this was
done he was killed; his owner can bring an action under the *Lex
Aquilia*, and his value must be estimated at the amount he was worth
before he lost his skill along with his thumb.

(4) Where, however, a slave is killed who had committed great frauds in
my accounts, and whom I had intended to put to torture in order to
extract from him the names of his accomplices in the frauds, Labeo very
properly holds that the value of the slave should be estimated at the
amount of the interest I had in detecting the frauds committed by him,
and not on the basis of the loss caused by the slave himself.

(5) If, however, a well-behaved slave should change his habits, and be
killed within a year; the estimate of his value should be made upon the
basis of what he was worth before the change took place.

(6) In short, it must be held that whatever advantage rendered the
slave more valuable at any time within the year during which he was
killed, should be included in the appraisement of his actual value.

(7) Where an infant slave who is not yet a year old is killed, the
better opinion is that the appraisement of his value should be referred
to that part of the year during which he was living.

(8) It is established that this action is granted to the heir and other
successors; but it will not be granted against the heir and the
successors of the other party, as it is a penal one; unless the said
heir should have become more wealthy through the damage which was
caused.

(9) Where a slave is killed through malice, it is established that his
owner can also bring suit under the *Lex Cornelia*, and if he proceeds
under the *Lex Aquilia*, his suit under the *Lex Cornelia* will not be
barred.

(10) This action can be brought for civil damages where the party
confesses his guilt, and for double damages where he denies it.

(11) Where anyone confesses that he killed a slave who is still living,
and afterwards is prepared to show that the said slave is still alive;
Julianus says that the *Lex Aquilia* does not apply, even though the
party confesses that he killed him; because where the suit is based on a
confession the plaintiff is not required to prove that the party who
killed the slave was the defendant, but it is essential that the slave
should have been killed by somebody.

24. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

This point is more clearly shown where a slave is said to be wounded;
but if the defendant should confess that he has wounded him, and this
was not the case, upon what wound are we to base the appraisement, or to
what date are we to refer?

25. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Hence, if the slave was not killed, but died, the better opinion is that
the defendant should not be liable for the dead slave, even though he
may have confessed that he killed him.

(1) Where an agent, a guardian, a curator, or anyone else confesses
that his absent principal wounded a slave, a pr√¶torian action based upon
the confession should be granted against said party.

(2) It should be noted that in this action which is granted against the
person making a confession, the judge is appointed not for the purpose
of rendering a decision, but to assess the damages; for no trial can
take place for the conviction of persons who confess.

26. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

Suppose, for example, that the person against whom the action is brought
should confess that he killed the slave, and be prepared to pay his
appraised value, and his adversary makes a very high estimate of the
same.

27. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Where one slave carries off another belonging to a different owner, and
kills him, both Julianus and Celsus hold that an action based on theft
as well as one on wrongful damage will lie.

(1) Where a slave is owned in common, that is to say, belongs to you
and me, and he kills another slave belonging to me, a suit based on the
*Lex Aquilia* can be brought against you, if the slave acted with your
consent; and Proculus also held this opinion, as Urseius asserts. But if
he did not commit the act with your consent, a noxal action will not
lie, lest it might be in the power of the slave to belong to you alone.
I think this to be correct.

(2) Moreover, if a slave who is held in common by you and me is killed
by a slave belonging to Titius, Celsus says that if one of the owners
brings suit, he will either obtain a proportionate amount of the damages
assessed, or the slave must be absolutely surrendered by way of
reparation, because this is a matter which is not susceptible of
division.

(3) The owner is liable on account of the slave who committed the
homicide, and he whom he is serving as a slave in good faith is not
liable; but the question arises whether a party whose slave is a
fugitive, is liable on his account under the *Lex Aquilia*? Julianus
says that he is liable. This is perfectly true, and Marcellus also holds
the same opinion.

(4) The second Section of this law has fallen into desuetude.

(5) In the third Section the *Lex Aquilia* says, "If anyone damages the
property of another except by killing slaves or cattle, whatever the
value of the property burned, broken to pieces, or injured, was, within
the preceding thirty days; the party must be compelled to pay the amount
to the owner of the same".

(6) Hence, if a man should not kill a slave or an animal but should
burn, break, or injure any other property, proceedings could undoubt-

edly be taken under this provision of the law. Therefore, if you throw a
torch at my slave and burn him, you will be liable to me.

(7) Moreover, if you set fire to my trees, or to my farmhouse, I am
entitled to an action under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(8) If anyone should intend to burn my house, and the fire spreads to
the house of my neighbor, he will be liable also to the neighbor under
the *Lex Aquilia;* and he will be not less liable to the tenants, on
account of the burning of their personal property.

(9) If the slave of a tenant who has charge of a furnace goes to sleep
in front of it, and the house burns down; Neratius says that where an
action is brought on the lease the tenant must make good the loss, if he
was negligent in the selection of persons in his service; but where one
person kindled the fire in the furnace, and another was negligent in
looking after it, will he who kindled the fire be liable? He who had
charge of the fire did nothing, and he who kindled it properly was
blameless; what then is the conclusion? I think that a pr√¶torian action
will lie both against him who fell asleep before the furnace and against
him who neglected to attend to it, for no one should say with reference
to the one who went to sleep that his failing was only human and
natural, since he should either have extinguished the fire, or have
protected it in such a way that it could not spread.

(10) If you have an oven against a party-wall will you be liable for
wrongful damage? Proculus says that no action can be brought, because
none will lie against a party who has a hearth. Therefore, I think it is
more just that an action should be granted *in factum*, of course, if
the wall is burned; but if you have not yet caused me any damage, but
your fire is in such a place that I am afraid that you will do so, I
think that a bond providing against threatened injury will be
sufficient.

(11) Proculus says that where the slaves of a tenant burn down a
farm-house, the tenant will be liable either under the lease or under
the *Lex Aquilia*, so that he can surrender the slaves by way of
reparation; and where the case has been decided under one of the
actions, no further proceedings can be instituted under the other. This
is understood only to apply where the tenant was not guilty of
negligence; but if he owned slaves who were in the habit of committing
criminal acts, he will be liable for wrongful damage for having slaves
of this kind.

He states that the same rule must be observed with reference to persons
who lodge in a building; and this opinion is reasonable.

(12) If my bees fly away to yours, and you burn them, Celsus says that
I have a right of action against you under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(13) The law says "break to pieces". This word almost all ancient
authorities understood to mean the same as "destroy".

(14) Therefore, Celsus makes the inquiry, if you sowed darnel or weeds
in the wheat-field of another, the owner of the same can not only
institute proceedings under the interdict *Quod vi aut clam*, (or if the
land is leased, the tenant can do so) but he can also bring an action
*in factum*; and if the tenant brings it he must give security that no
other proceedings shall be instituted; this, of course, being done in
order to

prevent the owner from causing further annoyance, for it is one kind of
damage to destroy or change something, for the purpose of giving cause
for a suit under the *Lex Aquilia*; and another, when, without changing
the substance of the article itself, you mingle something with it, the
separation of which would be troublesome.

(15) Celsus says, that it is evident that suit can be brought under the
Aquilian Law where a party puts filth in wine, or spills it, or makes it
sour, or spoils it in any other way; for both pouring it out and making
it sour are embraced in the words "destroy".

(16) And he does not deny that "break to pieces", and "burn" are also
included in the word "destroy"; but that there is nothing new where
certain things are especially enumerated in the law, for it usually adds
a general term including those specific things. This opinion is correct.

(17) We must, by all means, understand that the expression "break to
pieces" is applicable where a party wounds a slave, or strikes him with
a stick, or a strap, or with his fist, or with a weapon, or with
anything else which would cut or raise a swelling upon the body of
anyone, but only to the extent where wrongful damage is committed.

But where the act does not diminish the value of the slave or render him
less useful, the *Lex Aquilia*, is not available, and an action for
injury alone can be brought; for the *Lex Aquilia* only applies to such
injuries as have caused loss. Therefore, if the value of the slave is
not diminished, but expenses have been incurred to have him made well
and sound again, it is held that I am damaged to that extent; and
therefore an action can be brought under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(18) Where anyone tears, or soils the clothes of another, he is liable,
just as if he had destroyed them.

(19) Moreover, if anyone throws my millet or wheat into a river, the
action under the *Lex Aquilia* will be sufficient.

(20) Again, where anyone mixes sand or something else with my wheat, so
that it will be difficult to separate it, proceedings can be brought
against him just as if he had destroyed it.

(21) If anyone should knock coins out of my hand, Sabinus is of the
opinion that an action for wrongful injury will lie, if they are lost in
such a way that they cannot come into anyone's possession, as for
instance, where they have fallen into a river, the sea, or a sewer; but
where they come into someone's possession, proceedings must be
instituted for theft caused by aid and advice. This was the opinion of
the ancient authorities. Sabinus says that an action *in factum* can
also be granted.

(22) If you strike a woman with your fist or a mare receives a blow
from you, and a miscarriage results, Brutus says that you are liable
under the *Lex Aquilia* for "breaking to pieces", as it were.

(23) And also, if anyone overloads a mule, and breaks one of its limbs,
the *Lex Aquilia* will be available.

(24) Where anyone pierces the hull of a vessel loaded with merchandise,
Viviannus says that an action will lie under the *Lex Aquilia* for
"breaking to pieces", as it were.

(25) If a party picks olives that are not ripe, or reaps grain that is
not mature, or gathers grapes that are green, he will be liable under
the *Lex Aquilia;* but if the crops have reached maturity, the *Lex
Aquilia*will not apply; for no wrong is committed, as the party has
presented you with the expenses which would have been incurred by
harvesting crops of this kind; if, however, he removes what has been
gathered he will be liable for theft. Octavenus says with reference to
grapes, "Unless he throws the grapes on the ground, so that they are
scattered".

(26) The same writer states with reference to cutting wood, that if
what is cut is immature, the party will be liable under the *Lex
Aquilia;* but if he takes it away after it is mature, he will be liable
for theft, as well as for cutting trees by stealth.

(27) Where you remove mature willows in such a way as not to injure the
trunks of the trees, the *Lex Aquilia* is not available.

(28) If anyone castrates a boy slave, and thereby renders him more
valuable, Vivianus says that the *Lex Aquilia* does not apply, but that
an action can be brought for injury, either under the Edict of the
√Üdiles, or for fourfold damages.

(29) If you entrust an artisan with a cup to be polished, and he breaks
it through want of skill, he will be liable for wrongful damage; but if
he does not break it through want of skill, but it had cracks which
spoiled it, he will be excusable; and therefore artisans, when things of
this description are entrusted to them, are generally accustomed to
provide by an agreement that the work will not be at their risk; and
this bars any right of action on the agreement, or under the *Lex
Aquilia*.

(30) Where a husband gives loose pearls to his wife for her own use,
and she perforates them without the consent or knowledge of her husband,
in order that they may afterwards be worn upon a string, she will be
liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, either after a divorce, or while she is
still married.

(31) Where anyone breaks down or forces open the doors of my building,
or demolishes the building itself, he is liable under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(32) Where anyone demolishes my aqueduct, although the materials of
which it was composed are my property, still, because the land through
which I bring the water is not mine, the better opinion is to say that a
pr√¶torian action should be granted.

(33) Where a stone falls from a wagon and destroys or breaks anything,
it is held that the driver of the wagon is liable to an action under the
*Lex Aquilia*, if he loaded the stones insecurely and for that reason
they slipped off.

(34) Where anyone employs a slave to lead a mule, and places the mule
in his care; and he ties the strap of the halter to his thumb, and the
mule breaks loose and tears off the thumb of the slave, and then
precipitates itself from a height; Mela says, that if a slave who was
unskillful was hired as being skillful, an action can be brought against
the owner of the slave on account of the mule which was destroyed, or
disabled; but if the mule was excited by a blow, or by fright, the
owner,

(that is to say, the owner of the mule as well as the owner of the
slave) will be entitled to an action under the *Lex Aquilia*, against
the person who frightened the mule. It seems to me, however, that even
in a case where an action on contract will lie, one also can be brought
under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(35) Moreover, if you entrust a vat full of wine to be repaired by a
plasterer, and he breaks a hole in it so that the wine runs out, Labeo
says that an action *in factum* will lie.

28. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X*.

Where persons dig pits for the purpose of catching bears or deer, and do
this on the highway, and anything falls into them and is injured, they
will be liable under the *Lex Aquilia;* but they will not be liable if
they dug the pits in some other place where this is ordinarily done.

(1) This action, however, should only be brought where proper cause is
shown; that is to say, where no notice was given, and the owner had no
knowledge, and could not provide against the accident. And indeed, a
great many instances of this kind are encountered, in which a plaintiff
is barred if he could have avoided the danger;

29. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

Just as if you set traps in a place where you have no right to set them,
and the cattle of a neighbor are caught in them.

(1) If you cut off my roof which I have permitted to project over your
house without any right; Proculus states that I am entitled to an action
against you for wrongful damage, as you should have sued me, alleging
that I had no right to have a projecting roof; and it is not just that I
should suffer damage through your cutting off my timbers.

A contrary rule is to be found in a Rescript of the Emperor Severus, who
stated in said Rescript to a party through whose house an aqueduct was
carried without any servitude existing, that he had a right to destroy
it himself; and this seems reasonable, for the difference is that in one
instance a man built the roof on land which belonged to him and in the
other, the party built the aqueduct on the premises of someone else.

(2) If your ship collides with my boat and I am damaged, the question
arises what action shall I be entitled to? Proculus says that if it was
in the power of the sailors to prevent the accident, and it occurred
through their negligence, an action can be brought against them under
the *Lex Aquilia,*because it makes but little difference whether you
cause damage by driving the ship at the boat, or by steering towards the
ship, or inflict the injury with your own hands; as in all these ways I
sustain damage through your agency, but where the ship ran against the
boat on account of a broken rope, or because there was no one to steer
it, an action cannot be brought against the owner.

(3) Labeo also says, that where a ship is impelled by the force of the
wind against cables attached to the anchors of another ship, and the
sailors cut the cables; and the ship cannot be extricated in any other
way but by cutting the cables, no action should be granted.

Labeo and Proculus are of the same opinion with reference to the nets of
fishermen in which a vessel belonging to others had become entangled;
and it is evident that if this took place through the negligence of the
sailors, an action under the *Lex Aquilia* should be brought. Where,
however, suit is brought for wrongful damage to the nets, no estimate
should be taken of the fish which were not caught on this account; since
it is uncertain whether any would have been caught. The same rule is
adopted in the case of hunters, and bird-catchers.

(4) If one ship collides with another approaching in the opposite
direction, an action on the ground of wrongful damage will lie either
against the steersman or the captain, so Alfenus says. Where, however,
the ship was driven with too much force to be controlled, no action can
be granted against the owner; still if the trouble occurred through the
negligence of the sailors, I think that an action under the *Lex
Aquilia* would be sufficient.

(5) Where anyone cuts a cable by which a vessel is secured, and the
vessel is lost in consequence, an action *in factum* will lie.

(6) Under this Section of the law proceedings can be instituted by this
action for the injury of any animals which are not classed as cattle,
for instance, a dog; and the same rule will apply with respect to a wild
boar, or lion, and other wild beasts and birds.

(7) Municipal magistrates who have committed wrongful damage can be
held liable under the *Lex Aquilia;* for where any of them has taken
cattle of yours in execution, and allows them to die of hunger, by not
permitting you to give them food an action *in factum* should be
granted. Moreover, where he thinks that he is levying an execution in
accordance with law, but does not actually do so, and restores the
property worn out and ruined, it is held that the *Lex Aquilia* will
apply; and this, indeed, can also be stated where the execution was
levied in compliance with the law. Where, however, a magistrate
committed violence against a party who was resisting, he would not be
liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, for when one took a slave in execution
and the latter hanged himself, no action was granted.

(8) The words, "Whatever was the value during the last thirty days",
although the greatest value is not expressly stated, still it is
established that this should be understood.

30. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

Where anyone kills the slave of another who is caught in adultery he
will not be liable under this law.

(1) Where a slave given by way of pledge was afterwards killed, an
action will lie in favor of the debtor, whether the creditor is entitled
to a pr√¶torian action on account of his interest in the slave, for the
reason that the debtor is not solvent; or because he has lost his right
of action by lapse of time, is a question. But it is unjust that the
party should be liable to both the owner and the creditor, unless
someone might hold that the debtor, in this instance, had not sustained
any injury, since he had profited to the amount of the debt, and
anything above that amount he could recover from the creditor; or, in
the begin-

ning, an action will be granted to the debtor for any amount in excess
of the debt. Hence, in those instances in which an action should be
granted to the creditor on account of the poverty of the debtor, or
because he has lost his right of action, the creditor will be entitled
to bring suit under the *Lex Aquilia* for the amount of the debt, and
this will benefit the debtor to that extent; and an action under the
*Lex Aquilia* will lie in favor of the debtor for the amount of legal
damages over and above the debt.

(2) Where anyone consumes wine or grain belonging to another he is not
held to have committed wrongful damage; and therefore a pr√¶torian action
should be granted.

(3) In the action which arises out of this Section, malice and
negligence are punished. Therefore, where anyone sets fire to his
stubble or thorns for the purpose of burning them, and the fire
increases and spreads so as to injure the wheat or vines of another; we
must ask whether this happened through his want of skill, or his
negligence; for if he did this on a windy day he is guilty of
negligence, as a person who affords an opportunity for the commission of
damage is considered to have caused it; and he is equally guilty if he
did not take precautions to prevent the fire from spreading. If,
however, he took all necessary precautions, or a sudden, violent gust of
wind caused the fire to spread, he is not guilty of negligence.

(4) Where a slave is wounded but not mortally, and dies from neglect,
an action can be brought for wounding, but not for killing him.

31. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book X*.

Where a trimmer of trees throws down a branch, or a man working on an
elevation kills a passer-by, he is only liable where he threw down the
object in a public place, and did not give warning, that the accident
might be avoided. Mucius, however, states that even if this happened on
private property, an action could be brought for negligence; because it
is negligence when provision was not made by taking such precautions as
a diligent man would have done, or warning was only given when the
danger could not have been avoided. On this principle it does not make
much difference whether the party injured was traversing public or
private ground, since it very frequently happens that many persons go
through private ground. If there is no roadway there, the party is only
liable for malice where he throws something down on anyone who is
passing by; for he cannot be held accountable for negligence, as he
would be unable to conjecture whether anyone is going to pass through
that place or not.

32. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

This question has been asked, namely: whether the same rule should be
observed in an action for wrongful damage which is adopted by the
proconsul in the case of theft committed by a number of slaves; (that is
to say, whether the right to the collection of the penalty should not be
granted with reference to every individual slave; but it will be
sufficient for the amount to be made good which would have to

be paid if a single freeman had committed the theft?) The better opinion
seems to be that the same rule should be observed, and there is reason
in this; for, as the principle which applies in an action for theft is
that an owner should not be deprived of his entire body of slaves on
account of one offence; the same principle should, in like manner, apply
where an action is brought for wrongful damage, and the same kind of
valuation should be made, especially since sometimes in an instance of
this kind the offence is not of a serious character; for example, where
the damage was committed through negligence and not through malice. (1)
Where the same person wounds a slave and then afterwards kills him, he
is liable for both wounding and killing him; for there are two
offences.^1^ It is otherwise where anyone in the same attack kills a
slave by inflicting many wounds; for then only one action, that for
killing him, can be brought.

33. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book II*.

If you kill my slave, I do not think that my affection for him should be
considered; as, for instance, if anyone should kill your natural son
whom you would be willing to purchase at a high price if he belonged to
someone else; but the question involved is what is he worth generally
speaking? Sextus Pedius says that the price of property is not fixed by
affection or by beneficial interest, but on general principles; so that
a man who has possession of his natural son as a slave, is none the more
wealthy because if someone else had possession of him he would be
willing to purchase him for a considerable sum of money; and the party
who has possession of the son of another has not property enough to be
equal to what he could sell that son for to his father; for under the
*Lex Aquilia*, we can recover damages, and we will be considered to have
lost either what we could have obtained, or what we were compelled to
pay out.

(1) An action *in factum* is granted with reference to damages which
are not included in the *Lex Aquilia*.

34. *Marcellus, Digest, Book XXI*.

A party bequeathed Stichus to Titius and Seius, and while Seius was
deliberating and after Titius had brought suit to recover the legacy,

^1^ This is in direct contravention of the English and American doctrine
by which the lesser offence is considered to be merged in the greater
and only the more serious one can be made the subject of prosecution.
The English rule, however, that where a person is indicted for felony he
cannot be convicted of a misdemeanor, is not generally adopted in this
country. Merger cannot exist, however, unless the two breaches of the
law are intimately connected with one another with respect to place,
time, and other conditions rendering this association necessary. The
distinction under the English law owed the origin to the several
restrictions placed upon the defendant accused of felony which were not
applicable in a trial for the commission of a misdemeanor. An indicted
felon could not employ an attorney, he had no right to challenge a
juryman, and he was even refused a copy of the indictment to which he
was required to answer. In many States of the Union a defendant, where
proof of felony is not conclusive, can, by permission of the court plead
guilty of a misdemeanor, but nowhere can he be tried for both degrees of
crime under separate indictments. ‚Äî ED.

Stichus was killed, and then Seius rejected the legacy. In this instance
Titius can bring an action just as if the legacy had been bequeathed to
him alone.

35. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII*.

For the reason that the ownership is held to have accrued to him
retroactively;

36. *Marcellus, Digest, Book XXI*.

For as where an heir is entitled to an action when a legatee rejects a
legacy, just as if the slave had not been bequeathed; so Titius has a
right of action, just as if the slave had been left to him alone.

(1) Where the owner of a slave, whom Titius mortally wounded, orders by
his will that he shall be free and become his heir, and subsequently
M√¶vius becomes the heir to the slave, M√¶vius will not be entitled to an
action under the *Lex Aquilia* against Titius, according to the opinion
of Sabinus, who held that the right of action was not transmitted to the
heir where the deceased would not have been entitled to the right; but
it would truly seem to be absurd that an heir should obtain damages to
the value of the person killed, and whose heir he was. Where, however,
the owner ordered that he should be free and also be his heir to a part
of his estate, then, when he died, his co-heir can bring an action under
the *Lex Aquilia*.

37. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XIV*.

Where a freeman committed an injury with his own hands by order of
another, an action under the *Lex Aquilia* can be brought against the
party who gave the order; provided he had the right of commanding; but
if he did not have it, proceedings must be instituted against the party
who committed the act.

(1) Where a quadruped, on account of which a right of action exists
against its owner because it has committed damage, is killed by another
party against whom suit is then brought under the *Lex Aquilia*, the
estimation of the value of said animal must be made, not with reference
to what it is actually worth, but to the circumstances under which the
right of action for damages exists; and the party who killed the animal
must have judgment rendered against him in a suit under the *Lex
Aquilia* to the amount of the interest the plaintiff had to settle the
case through surrendering the animal by way of reparation, rather than
by paying the damages which have been estimated.

38. *The Same, Epistles, Book IX*.

If at the time when my slave whom you purchased in good faith is serving
you, he is wounded by one of your slaves; it has been held that I have,
in every instance, a right to institute proceedings against you under
the *Lex Aquilia*.

39. *Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XVII*.

Quintus Mucius says that while a mare was pasturing on the land of
another she lost her foal, when the owner of the land was driving her

away; and the question was asked whether or not the owner of the mare
could proceed under the *Lex Aquilia* against the party who had driven
her away, because he had injured the mare by striking her? And it was
held that if he struck her, or designedly drove her away with too much
violence, he can bring suit.

(1) Pomponius. Even though anyone should find the cattle of another on
his own land, he must drive them away in the same manner as he would his
own; since, if he has sustained any damage on account of their being
there he has a suitable right of action. Therefore, where anyone finds
the cattle of another on his own premises, he cannot lawfully shut them
up, nor should he drive them away in any other manner than if they were
his own (as we stated above) but he must either drive them away without
injuring them, or notify the owner to remove them.

40. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book III*.

Under the *Lex Aquilia*, if I allege that a note belonging to me, and in
which it was stated that a sum of money was owing to me under a
condition, has been defaced; and, in the meantime, I am able to prove
this by witnesses who may be unable to testify at the time when the
condition is fulfilled, and I state the facts in a few words in court
and establish this to the satisfaction of the judge, I ought to succeed;
but the payment of the sum for which judgment is rendered can only take
place when the condition upon which the debt depended shall be complied
with; and if it should fail, the judgment will have no force or effect.

41. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI*.

Where anyone defaces a will, let us consider whether an action for
wrongful damage will not lie? Marcellus states with some hesitation in
the Fifth Book of the Digest, that the action cannot be brought; for he
asks in what way can the amount of damages be ascertained? I made a note
on Marcellus that this is indeed true with reference to the testator,
because no estimate can be made of his interest in the matter; but with
reference to the heir or legatees the case is different, since, so far
as they are concerned, a will is almost the same as a written
acknowledgment of a debt; and Marcellus also says that where a
promissory note is defaced by erasure, an action under the *Lex Aquilia*
will lie.

Moreover, if anyone should destroy a will deposited with him, or should
read the same in the presence of several persons, it is more advisable
for an action *in factum* ‚Äî and for injury as well ‚Äî to be brought if
the party published the secret provisions of the will for the purpose of
committing a wrong.

(1) Pomponius very properly states that it sometimes happens that a
party by destroying a will does not become liable for theft, but only
for the commission of injury, for instance where he did not destroy it
with the intention of committing a theft, but only to cause damage; for
then he will not be liable for theft, since theft involves not only the
act of stealing but the intention also.

42. *Julianus, Digest, Book XLVIII*.

Where anyone so defaces a will which has been deposited with him (or any
other instrument for the conveyance of property) so that it cannot be
read, he will be liable to an action on deposit, and also to one for the
production of an instrument in court, because he either returned or
produced the document in a ruined condition. An action under the *Lex
Aquilia* will also lie in a case of this kind, for where a party
falsifies documents, he is very properly said to have ruined them.

43. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIX*.

You are entitled to an action under the *Lex Aquilia* on account of
damage committed against an estate before you entered upon it as heir,
even though this took place after the death of the party whose heir you
are; for the *Lex Aquilia* designates as owner not merely the person who
was so at the time when the damage was committed; for under these
circumstances the right of action could not pass to him from the party
whose heir he was, since this would be the same case as where you have
been in the power of the enemy and, having returned, can not bring suit
under the right of *postliminium* for what had taken place during your
captivity; and no other rule than this can be established without great
disadvantage to posthumous children who become the heirs of their
parents.

We hold that the same rule applies with reference to trees which have
been cut by stealth during the same time. I am of the opinion that this
also applies to the proceeding *Quod vi aut clam*, provided the party
committed the act after he had been notified not to do so, or it is
apparent that he should have known that he would have been notified by
the parties to whom the estate belonged if they had been aware of what
he was going to do.

44. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLII*.

Under the *Lex Aquilia* the slightest negligence is taken in
consideration.

(1) Whenever a slave wounds or kills anyone, there is no doubt that his
owner is liable under the *Lex Aquilia*.

45. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X*.

In this instance we understand knowledge to signify sufferance, so that
where the party is able to prevent the act, and does not do so, he will
be liable.

(1) Proceedings can be brought under the *Lex Aquilia* where a wounded
slave is cured.

(2) If you kill my slave being under the impression that he is free,
you will be liable under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(3) Where two slaves leap over burning straw and collide with one
another, and both fall and one is burned to death; in this instance an
action cannot be brought where it is not known which of them was
overthrown by the other.

(4) Where parties commit damage because they could not otherwise
protect themselves, they are guiltless; for all laws and all legal
principles permit persons to repel force by force. But if I throw a
stone at an adversary for the purpose of defending myself, and I do not
hit him but do hit a passer-by, I will be liable under the *Lex
Aquilia;* for you are only permitted to strike a person who is attacking
you, and this solely where you do so in defending yourself, and not
where it is done for the purpose of revenge.

(5) Where a party removes a wall which is useful, he is liable to the
owner of the same for wrongful damage.

46. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book L*.

If, where a slave is wounded, an action is brought under the *Lex
Aquilia*, and the slave afterwards dies of the wound, an action can
still be brought under the *Lex Aquilia*.

47. *Julianus, Digest, Book LXXXVI*.

But if in the first suit an estimate of his value was made, and
afterwards the slave should die, his owner can bring an action for
killing him, and if he is met with an exception based on malicious
fraud, measures should be taken to prevent the plaintiff from recovering
more by both suits than he would have obtained if he had in the
beginning brought an action for killing the slave.

48. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX*.

If a slave should commit damage to an estate before it had been entered
upon, and, after having been liberated, he should cause other damage to
the property, he will be liable to both actions, because these things
have reference to two different acts.

49. *Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IX*.

Where anyone drives away bees belonging to another or even kills them by
means of making smoke, he is held rather to have furnished the cause of
their death than to have actually killed them, and therefore he will be
liable to an action *in factum*.

(1) Where it is stated that wrongful damage can be prosecuted under the
*Lex Aquilia*, this must be understood to mean that wrongful damage was
committed when wrong was done together with damage, unless the act was
committed under the compulsion of overpowering force; as Celsus states
with reference to a party who destroyed an adjoining house for the
purpose of controlling a fire; for in this instance he says that no
action will lie under the *Lex Aquilia*, because the man destroyed the
adjoining house being impelled by a just apprehension that the fire
might reach his premises, and whether the fire did so or whether it was
previously extinguished, he thinks that an action under the *Lex
Aquilia* cannot be brought.

50. *The Same, Opinions, Book VI*.

Where a party demolishes the house of another without the consent of the
owner, and builds baths on the site, then, irrespective of natural

law, which declares that the surface belongs to the owner of the soil,
the aggressor will be liable to an action on account of damage caused.

51. *Julianus, Digest, Book LXXXVI*.

A slave was so seriously wounded that it was certain that he would die
from the blow; but, in the meantime, he was appointed an heir, and
afterwards died from a blow inflicted by another. I ask whether an
action for causing his death can be brought under the *Lex Aquilia*
against both the parties who injured him? The answer was that anyone is
ordinarily said to have killed who in any way furnished the cause of
death; but under the *Lex Aquilia* he alone is held to be liable who
furnished the cause of death by actual violence, and, as it were, with
his own hand, the interpretation of the word "*occidere*" being derived
from the terms "*c√¶dere*" and "*c√¶des*".

Moreover, not only those who have wounded a slave so badly as to
immediately deprive him of life are held to be liable under the *Lex
Aquilia,*but also those who have inflicted such a wound that it is
certain that the slave will die hereafter. Therefore, where anyone
inflicts a mortal wound upon a slave, and another, before his death,
strikes him in such a way that he dies sooner than he otherwise would as
the result of a first wound, it should be held that both offenders are
liable under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(1) This agrees with the opinion of the ancient authorities, who, where
a slave was badly wounded by several persons and it was not ascertained
by whose blow he died; it has been decided that all of them are liable
under the *Lex Aquilia*.

(2) The damages for causing death will not be the same for both parties
in this instance; for the one who first wounded him must pay an amount
equal to the greatest value of the slave during the past year; and this
is ascertained by computing three hundred and sixty five days from the
date of the wound. The second one would be liable for an amount equal to
the largest sum which the slave would have brought during the year
before the day on which he died, and this will also include the value of
the estate. Hence one of them will pay a larger amount and the other a
smaller amount for having killed the same slave; and there is nothing
surprising in this, since both parties are held to have killed the slave
in different ways and at different times.

If anyone should think that this decision of ours is absurd, let him
reflect that it would be still more absurd for it to be held that
neither of the parties was liable under the *Lex Aquilia*, or that one
of them was more liable than the other; since offences must not go
unpunished; nor is it easy to determine which one is more liable under
the law. For numerous rules have been established by the Civil Law for
the public welfare which are at variance with the principles of
reasoning, as can be proved by innumerable examples; and I shall be
content with referring to only one of them. Where several persons carry
away a beam belonging to another with the intention of stealing it,
which they could not have done singly, they are all held to be liable to
an action for theft; although by

an ingenious argument not one of them can be said to be liable because
it is true that not one of them carried off the beam.

52. *Alfenus, Digest, Book II*.

Where a slave dies from the effect of blows, and this is not the result
of the ignorance of a physician or of the neglect of the owner, an
action for injury can be brought for his death.

(1) The keeper of a shop placed his lantern on a stone in a street at
night, and a passer-by took it away; the shopkeeper followed him and
demanded the lantern, and detained the party as he was trying to escape.
The latter began to strike the shopkeeper with a whip which he held in
his hand and to which an iron was attached, in order to compel him to
release his hold. The struggle having become more serious, the
shopkeeper knocked out the eye of the party who had taken away his
lantern, and he asked for an opinion whether he could not be considered
not to have inflicted unlawful damage, as he had been first struck with
a whip? I answered that unless he had knocked out his eye designedly he
would not be considered to have caused unlawful damage, because the
party who first struck him with the whip was to blame; but if he had not
first been beaten, but had fought with the party who is trying to take
the lantern from him, the shopkeeper must be held to be responsible for

the act.

(2) Mules were hauling two loaded wagons up the Capitoline Hill, and
the drivers were pushing the first wagon which was inclined to one side
in order that the mules might haul it more easily; in the meantime the
upper wagon began to go back, and as the drivers were between the two
wagons they withdrew, and the last wagon was struck by the first and
moved back, crushing a slave boy who belonged to someone. The owner of
the boy asked me against whom he ought to bring an action? I answered
that it depended upon circumstances, for if the drivers who had hold of
the first wagon voluntarily got out of the way, and the result was that
the mules could not hold the wagon and were pulled back by its weight,
then no action would lie against the owner of the mules, but an action
under the *Lex Aquilia* could be brought against the men who had hold of
the wagon; for if a party, while he was supporting something, by
voluntarily releasing his hold enabled it to strike someone, he,
nevertheless, committed damage; as for instance, where anyone was
driving an ass and did not restrain it; or where anyone were to
discharge a weapon, or throw some other object out of his hand.

But if the mules gave way because they were frightened, and the drivers,
actuated by fear of being crushed, released their hold on the wagon,
then no action can be brought against the men but one could be brought
against the owner of the mules. And if neither the mules nor the men
were the cause of the accident, but the mules could not hold the load,
or while striving to do so slipped and fell, and this caused the wagon
to go back, and the men were unable to support the weight when the wagon
was inclined to one side, then no action could be brought either against
the owner of the mules or the men. This, however, is certain, that no
matter what the circumstances were, no action would lie

against the owner of the mules which were in the rear, as they did not
go back voluntarily, but because they were struck.

(3) A certain man sold some oxen under the condition that he would
permit the purchaser to try them, and he afterwards delivered them to be
tried; and a slave of the purchaser while trying them was struck with
the horn of one of the oxen. The question arose whether the vendor must
pay damages to the purchaser? I answered that if the purchaser held the
oxen as already purchased, he would not be compelled to pay; but if he
had not obtained them with that understanding, then, if through the
slave's negligence he was wounded by the ox, damages would not have to
be paid, but if it was due to the viciousness of the ox, they would be.

(4) Where several persons were playing ball, one of them pushed a small
slave while he was trying to pick up the ball, and the slave fell and
broke his leg. The question arose whether the owner of the slave could
bring suit under the *Lex Aquilia* against the party who, by pushing
him, had caused him to fall. I answered that he could not, as this
seemed to have been done rather through accident than through
negligence.

53. *Neratius, Parchments, Book I*.

You drove oxen belonging to another into a narrow place which caused
them to be thrown to the ground and injured. An action resembling that
brought under the *Lex Aquilia* will be granted against you.

54. *Papinianus, Questions, Book XXXVII*.

A debtor is entitled to an action under the *Lex Aquilia* where a party
who stipulated for delivery, and before default of the debtor, wounds
the animal which was promised; and the same rule applies if he should
kill it. But where the party who stipulated kills the animal after the
default of the promisor, the debtor will undoubtedly be discharged; but
in this instance he will not have a right to institute proceedings under
the *Lex Aquilia,*since the creditor must be held rather to have injured
himself rather than another.

55. *Paulus, Questions, Book XXII*.

I promised Titius to give him either Stichus or Pamphilus, Stichus being
worth ten thousand sesterces and Pamphilus twenty; and the stipulator
killed Stichus before I was in default. The question arose as to whether
an action could be brought under the *Lex Aquilia*? I answered that as
it has been stated that the least valuable slave has been killed, what
is to be discussed in this case does not in any way differ from that
between a creditor and a stranger. What then will be the measure of
damages? Must it be ten thousand sesterces which is the value of the
slave that was killed, or must it be the amount which I must pay, that
is the amount of my interest? And what shall we say if Pamphilus were to
die without any default on my part? Will the price of Stichus be
diminished since the promisor is discharged? It will be sufficient to
state that the value of the slave was greater when he was killed,

or within the year. On this principle Stichus must be considered to have
been worth more, even if he were killed after the death of Pamphilus,
but within the year.

56. *The Same, Sentences, Book II*.

If a woman damages the property of her husband, an action can be brought
against her according to the terms of the *Lex Aquilia*.

57. *Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book VI*.

I lent you a horse and while you were riding it several others were
riding with you, and one of them ran against your horse and threw you
off, and the legs of your horse were broken in consequence of the
accident. Labeo states that no action can be brought against you, but if
the accident took place through the negligence of the rider he can be
sued, but suit cannot be brought against the owners of the horse; and I
think this is correct.

TITLE III.

CONCERNING THOSE WHO POUR ANYTHING OUT OR THROW ANYTHING DOWN.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

The pr√¶tor says with reference to those who throw down or pour out
anything: Where anything is thrown down or poured out from anywhere upon
a place where persons are in the habit of passing or standing, I will
grant an action against the party who lives there for twofold the amount
of damage occasioned or done. If it is alleged that a freeman has been
killed by a blow from anything that fell, I will grant an action for
fifty *aurei.* If the party is living, and it is said that he is
injured, I will grant an action for an amount which would seem to be
just to the judge that the party against whom suit is brought should be
directed to pay. If it is alleged that a slave committed the act without
the knowledge of his master, I will add to the petition in the case the
words, "Or surrender the slave by way of reparation".

\(1) No one will deny that this Edict of the Pr√¶tor is of the greatest
advantage, as it is for the public welfare that persons should come and
go over the roads without fear or danger.

\(2) It makes, however, very little difference whether the place is
public or private, so long as persons ordinarily pass there; because the
Pr√¶tor had in view persons who were going their way, and particular
attention was not paid to highways; for those places through which
people ordinarily pass should have the same security. If, however, there
was a time when persons did not ordinarily pass that way, and anything
is then thrown down or poured out while the place was enclosed, but only
after that it began to be used for travel; the party will not be liable
under this Edict.

\(3) Where something falls down while being hung up, the better opinion
is that it should be held to have been thrown down; hence, where
something is poured out of a vessel which is suspended, even without the
agency of anyone, it must be said that the Edict is applicable.

\(4) This action *in factum* is granted against the party who lodged in
the house at the time when something was thrown down or poured out, and
not against the owner of the house, because the blame attaches to the
former. Mention of negligence or that the defendant

denies the fact is not made, in order to authorize an action for double
damages, although both of these matters are stated to afford good ground
for an action for wrongful damage.

\(5) Where a freeman is killed, the assessment of damages is not made
for double the amount, because in the case of a freeman no valuation of
his person is possible, but the judgment will be for the sum of fifty
*aurei.*

\(6) There words "If he is living and it is said that he is injured,"
have no reference to the damage which has been committed against the
property of a freeman; as, for instance, if his clothing or anything
else should be torn or spoiled, but only to those injuries inflicted
upon his body.

\(7) Where the son of a family has rented an upper chamber and something
is thrown down or poured out from it, an action *De peculio* is not
granted against his father, because no claim arising from contract
exists, and therefore the action must be brought against the son
himself.

\(8) Where a slave occupies the house, will a noxal action be granted,
since one does not lie on the ground of business transacted: or can one
*De peculio* be brought because no claim can be made on account of an
offence of the slave? We cannot properly say that the damage was
committed by the slave, since the latter committed no injury. I think,
however, that the slave should not be unpunished, but that he should be
corrected under the extraordinary authority of the judge.

\(9) We say that a party occupies a house whether he resides in his own
or one which is leased to him, or which he obtains gratuitously. It is
evident that a guest will not be liable, because he does not live there,
but is only entertained, but the party is liable who entertains him; and
there is as much difference between him who lives in a house and a
guest, as there is between one who has a domicile and the traveller who
has none.

\(10) Where several persons occupy the same room and something is thrown
down from it, this action will be granted against any one of them;

\2. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI.*

(Since it is absolutely impossible to know which of them threw it down
or poured it out) :

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

And suit can be brought for the entire amount, but where it is brought
against one of the parties the others will be discharged:

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

If the money has not been received on joinder of issue, the others will
be compelled by a partnership or by an equitable action to pay their
shares to the party who has made the settlement.^1^

^1^ This rule of contribution is still in force in both England and
America, for where one party alone pays the entire sum for which several
are jointly liable, he can recover from the others the amounts of their
respective shares. ¬ó ED.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

Where several persons occupy an apartment divided up among themselves,
an action will be granted against him alone who occupied that part from
which the pouring out was done.

\(1) Where anyone gives gratuitous lodgings to his freedman and his
clients or to those of his wife, Trebatius says that he is liable on
their account; and this is correct. The rule is the same where a man
distributes small lodgings among his friends, for if anyone rents
lodgings and he himself occupies the greater portion of the same, he
alone will be liable; but if he rents lodgings and retains for himself
only a small part, leasing the remainder to several persons, they will
all be liable as occupying the lodging from which the throwing down or
pouring out took place.

\(2) Sometimes, however, when no disadvantage results to the plaintiff,
the Pr√¶tor, influenced by equitable motives, ought rather to grant an
action against the party from whose bedroom or entry the object was
thrown down, even though several persons occupy the same lodging; but if
anything should be thrown down from the middle of the apartment, the
better opinion is that all are liable.

\(3) Where the keeper of a warehouse throws down or pours out anything,
or some one who has leased a storeroom, or has rented the place merely
for the performance of some labor or for purposes of giving instruction
does so, an action *in factum* will lie; even if one of the workmen or
scholars threw it down or poured it out.

\(4) Where, however, a party has judgment rendered against him under the
*Lex Aquilia* (because his guest, or anyone else, threw something down
from the apartment) it is reasonable, as Labeo says that an action *in
factum *should be granted against the party who did the throwing, and
this is true. It is evident, if he had leased the room to the party who
threw it down, that he will also be entitled to an action on the ground
of contract.

\(5) This action which can be brought for things which are poured out
and thrown down is a perpetual one, and is available by an heir but is
not granted against an heir; but the one which will lie where a freeman
is said to have been killed, can only be brought within a year, and is
not granted against an heir nor in favor of an heir or similar persons,
for it is a penal and a popular action, and we must always remember that
where several persons desire to bring a suit of this kind it should
preferably be granted to someone who has an interest in it, or was
allied to the deceased either by marriage or by blood.

Where, however, injury was inflicted upon a freeman he will have a
perpetual right of action; but if anyone else desires to institute
proceedings, the right will not extend beyond a year; nor are heirs
entitled to it as an hereditary privilege; since, where any bodily
injury is inflicted upon the freeman, no claim can be transmitted by
hereditary right to his successors, as no pecuniary loss is involved,
for the action is based on justice and equity.

\(6) The Pr√¶tor says, "No one shall have anything deposited upon a
projecting roof above a place which is ordinarily used as a pas-

sage-way or where people are accustomed to stand; if it can injure
anyone by its fall. I will grant an action *in factum* for ten *solidi
*against any person who violates this law; and if a slave is said to
have done this without the knowledge of his master, I will order this
amount to be paid, or the said slave to be surrendered by way of
reparation."

\(7) This provision is a part of the Edict previously referred to; for
it was only consistent that the Pr√¶tor should provide for this case as
well, so that if anything should be placed on any part of the house
which would be dangerous, it might not cause any injury.

\(8) The Pr√¶tor says, "No one," "on a projecting roof." These words "No
one" have reference to all persons, whether they occupy the house as
lodgers or as owners and whether they live there or not, so long as they
have anything exposed in these places.

\(9) "Who have anything deposited above a spot which is ordinarily used
as a passage-way or where people are accustomed to stand." We must
understand the term "deposited" to be applicable to a lodging or
apartment, or to a ware-house or any other building.

\(10) A person may properly be held to have something "deposited," even
if he did not place it himself but allowed this to be done by someone
else, and therefore if a slave should place it, and the owner allow it
to remain in that position, he will be held liable not to a noxal
action, but on his own account.

\(11) The Pr√¶tor says, "If it can injure anyone by its fall." It is
manifest from these words that the pr√¶tor only provides against injury
being done, not by everything which may be placed in such a position,
but by whatever is placed so that it may possibly cause injury, for we
do not wait until the injury is done, but the Edict is applicable if
injury can result at all; and the party who kept the object in its
position is punished whether it caused any damage by being placed there
or not.

\(12) Where the object that was placed falls down and causes damage, an
action will lie against the party who put it there, but not against the
occupant of the house, as this action is not sufficient, because the
party who placed the object cannot certainly be held to have kept it in
its position, unless he was either the owner or a resident of the house.
For when an artist had a shield or a picture on exhibition in a booth,
and it fell down and injured a passer-by, Servius was of the opinion
that an action corresponding to this one should be granted; for he said
that the latter evidently could not be brought, since the picture had
neither been placed on the eaves nor on the projecting roof.

He stated that the same rule should be observed where a jar which was
suspended in a net had fallen down and caused damage; for the reason
that both a legal and an equitable action was wanting.

\(13) This action is open to everyone, and lies in favor of an heir and
his successors, but it does not lie against heirs, because it is a penal
one.

\6. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

This Edict is not limited to cities and villages, but also has reference
to all roads along which persons ordinarily pass.

\(1) Labeo says that this Edict only applies where an object is thrown
down in the daytime, and not at night; still, in certain places

people also pass at night.

\(2) A person who occupies the premises is also responsible for the

negligence of his family.

\(3) Where anything is thrown out of a ship, an equitable action will be
granted against the party in charge of the ship.

\7. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI.*

Where the body of a freeman has been injured by something which has been
thrown down or poured out, the judge must take into consideration the
fees paid to a physician, and the other expenses incurred by the cure of
the individual, as well as the value of any occupation which the party
lost, or is liable to lose on account of having been disabled; but no
estimate will be made of scars or of any other disfigurement, because
the body of a freeman does not admit of appraisement.

TITLE IV. CONCERNING NOXAL ACTIONS.

\1. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book II.*

Those actions are called noxal which are brought against us, not with
reference to any contract, but as the result of some injury or
delinquency committed by slaves; and the force and effect of such
actions is that, if judgment is rendered against us, we can avoid the
payment of damages by the surrender of the body of him who committed the
offence.

\2. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII.*

Where a slave kills anyone with the knowledge of his owner, he renders
the latter liable for the full amount of damages, for it is held that
the owner himself committed the homicide; but where this was done
without the owner's knowledge, a noxal action will lie, as the owner
should not be held liable, on account of the offence of the slave, for
any more than to surrender him by way of reparation.

\(1) Where he did nothing to prevent the crime, whether he remains the
owner or ceases to be such, he will be liable to this action; for it is
sufficient if he was the owner at the time when he did not prevent the
act; and to such an extent is this the case, that Celsus thinks if the
slave should be alienated in whole or in part or manumitted, the damage
does not follow the person, for the slave did not commit any offence, as
he obeyed his owner's orders. And this may be truly said, if the latter
did order him, but if he only did not prevent him, how can we excuse the
act of the slave? Celsus, however, makes a distinction between the *Lex
Aquilia* and the Law of the Twelve Tables, for, under the ancient law,
if a slave committed a theft or caused any other damage with the
knowledge of his owner, a noxal action would lie on account of the
slave, and the owner would not be directly liable; but

he says that under the *Lex Aquilia* the owner would be directly liable,
and not liable on account of the slave. He then states the principle of
each of the two laws; the intention of that of the Twelve Tables being
that, in an instance of this kind, slaves should not obey their masters,
but in the case of the *Lex Aquilia* the law excused a slave who obeyed
his master, as he would have been put to death if he had not done so.
But if we consider as established what Julianus states in the
Eighty-sixth Book, that, "Where a slave commits a theft or causes some
injury," this has also reference to more recent laws; it may be said
that a noxal action can be granted against the owner on account of his
slave; so that because an Aquilian action is granted against the owner
this does not excuse the slave, but is a burden to the owner. We approve
of the opinion of Julianus, which is reasonable, and is supported by
Marcellus as is stated by Julianus.

\3. *The Same, On the Edict, Book III.*

In all noxal actions where the knowledge of the owner is required, this
must be understood to mean that the owner could have been able to
prevent the wrong but did not do so; for it is one thing to cause a
slave to commit an offence, and another to suffer him to do so.

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book III.*

With reference to the offences of slaves what are we to understand by
the "Knowledge of the owner"? Does it mean that the act was done by his
advice, or that he merely saw it done, although he could not prevent it?
For suppose that a slave who was taking measures to obtain his freedom
commits the act, with the knowledge of his owner, or pays no attention
to his owner; or suppose that the slave is on the opposite side of a
river and commits an injury while his master sees him, but does it
contrary to his will? It is better, however, to say that we must
understand the term "knowledge" to signify that a party is able to
prevent the deed, and this must be understood through the entire Edict
so far as the term "knowledge" is concerned.

\(1) Where a slave belonging to a stranger commits an illegal act with
my knowledge, and I purchase him; a noxal action will be granted against
me, because it cannot be held that he acted with the knowledge of his
owner as at that time I was not his owner.

\(2) Where an owner is liable on account of his knowledge, it should be
considered whether an action should be granted also with reference to
the slave; unless the Pr√¶tor intended that a single penalty only should
be exacted from the owner. Therefore should the malice of the slave be
unpunished? This would be unjust, for indeed the owner is liable in both
ways, still when one penalty, that is, whichever one the plaintiff
selects, is exacted, the other cannot be collected.

\(3) If the surrender of the slave by way of reparation is not
mentioned, and proceedings are brought against the owner on account of
his being aware of the offence, when, as a matter of fact, he was not
aware of it, and the case is dismissed and the trial terminated; the
plaintiff will be barred by an exception on the ground of *res
judicata*,

if he attempts to proceed further in order to obtain the surrender of
the slave; for the reason that the matter was previously brought to an
issue in the former trial and is now at an end. But, while the first
trial is proceeding, the plaintiff has the right to change his mind, if
he is attempting to prove the knowledge of the owner, and have recourse
to a noxal action.

On the other hand also, if he has proceeded with the noxal action
against the party who had knowledge, no other action will be granted him
against the owner if he left out the surrender of the slave by way of
reparation; but if, during the trial, he still wishes to prove the
knowledge of the owner, he cannot be prevented from doing so.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book V.*

Where a slave belonging to several persons commits an offence of which
they are all ignorant, a noxal action will be granted against any one of
them. But if they were all aware of it, any one of them will be liable
without consideration of the surrender of the slave by way of
reparation, just as if they had all committed the offence; nor will one
of them be liberated if the other should be sued. Still, where one of
the owners knew and the other was ignorant of the fact, the one who knew
will be sued without the surrender of the slave being considered, and
the one who did not know will be sued with the right to surrender him.

\(1) The difference between these two proceedings is not merely that the
owner who knows is liable for the entire amount, but also that if he who
knows should sell the slave or manumit him, and the slave should die,
the said owner will be liable; but if the owner himself should die, his
heir will not be liable.

\6. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XVIII.*

But the slave himself, if manumitted, will also be liable.

\7. *The Same, On the Edict, Book III.*

A noxal action, however, is not granted unless the slave is under my
control, and if he is, although he was not under my control at the time
he committed the offence, I will be liable, and my heir will be liable,
if the offending slave was living.

\(1) Pomponius says that if a purchaser of the slave is sued in a noxal
action, the vendor who had knowledge of the act can no longer be sued.

\8. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.*

Where a slave owned in common commits a theft, any one of his masters is
liable to a noxal action for the entire amount, and this is the rule at
the present time. But the party against whom suit is brought cannot
avoid payment of the damages unless he surrenders the slave entirely;
for if he should be ready to surrender only a share in him, this will
not be tolerated. It is evident that if, on account of this, the other
owners are not prepared to surrender the slave, he should then be
required to pay the entire amount, and he can institute pro-

ceedings against the other owner in partition, or for a division of the
interest in the slave. He can, however, before issue is joined in the
noxal action, obtain immunity by surrendering his share in the slave so
that it will not be necessary for him to make a defence; although
someone may state that it might happen where a share in said slave is
transferred to the party he loses his right of action; for when he
becomes the owner of a share he cannot institute proceedings against a
joint-owner by means of a noxal action; and perhaps he could not bring
an action in partition on account of an offence which was committed
before the joint-ownership began, and if he cannot do this he will
evidently suffer injury. It, however, seems to me best to hold that an
action for the division of common property will lie in his favor.

\9. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.*

Where a number of slaves held in common, or one alone commits a theft,
with the knowledge of one of his owners the latter will be liable in the
name of both, and if suit is brought against him this will release the
others from liability; nor can he obtain anything from his joint-owner,
as he deserved the penalty on account of his own act. But where one who
was ignorant of the commission of the offence pays double damages, he
can recover simple damages from his joint-owner.

\10. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXII.*

Moreover, anyone can bring suit against his joint-owner on the ground
that he has depreciated the value of the slave; just as he could against
anyone else who depreciated the value of property owned in common. If,
however, he held nothing in common after the surrender of the slave, he
can bring an action on partnership, or if they were not partners he can
bring an action *in factum.*

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book VII.*

The *bona fide* possessor of a slave will be liable to an action for
theft on account of the slave, but the owner will not be liable. He
cannot, however, by surrendering the slave make him the property of the
plaintiff, and if the owner should bring suit to recover the slave, he
will be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud, for the other
party can be made secure by application to the court.

\12. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book VI.*

Where a *bona fide* possessor dismisses a slave who was in his
possession under these circumstances, in order to avoid proceedings
being taken against him in a noxal action, he will be liable to the
action which is granted against parties who have a slave in their power
or commit fraud in order to avoid having him under their control,
because in this instance they are held to be still in possession.

\13. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIII.*

A noxal action is granted not only against a possessor in good faith,
but also against those who have possession in bad faith; for it seems
absurd that parties who are *bona fide* possessors should be compelled
to defend an action, and that depredators should be secure.

\14. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII.*

Where anyone is sued by several persons on account of an offence
committed by his slave, or by one person on account of several offences,
then it will not be necessary for him to tender the amount of damages
assessed to those to whom he cannot surrender the slave, since he cannot
surrender him to all of them. What then is the rule if he is sued by
several parties? If, indeed, one of them has anticipated the others, is
his position better, and shall the slave be surrendered to him alone? Or
shall he be surrendered to all of them, or must the defendant furnish
security that he will defend his adversary against the other parties?

It is the better opinion that the position of the party who has
anticipated the others is preferable. Therefore the slave should be
surrendered, not to the plaintiff who first instituted proceedings, but
to the one who first obtained judgment; and hence an action to enforce
the judgment will be refused to a party who gains his case subsequently.

\(1) If a slave is entitled to his freedom conditionally, and the
condition is fulfilled before the surrender; or if he should obtain his
freedom under the terms of a trust, or a condition is complied with in
accordance with which the ownership of the slave was bequeathed as a
legacy and transferred, the defendant must be discharged by an order of
court; and it is part of the duty of the judge to provide that the party
to whom he is surrendered shall give security against the recovery of
the slave by eviction on account of an act of the defendant.

\15. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI.*

The Pr√¶tor should order the action to be transferred so as to be
conducted against the said former slave, but if, at the time of the
trial, the freedom of the slave is still in suspense, Sabinus and
Cassius are of the opinion that the heir is released from liability by
giving up the slave, since he has thereby assigned all of his own
rights; and this is true.

\16. *Julianus, Digest, Book XXII.*

If the heir, through malicious fraud, should relinquish his authority
over said slave, and by reason of this should join issue in an action
not permitting the noxal surrender of the slave, judgment should be
rendered against him, just as if the slave was dead; even if the
condition on which the slave was entitled to his freedom should have
been fulfilled.

\17. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII.*

Where a slave who belongs to two owners commits an offence with the
knowledge of one of them but without that of the other, if suit is
brought against the one who is ignorant of the fact and he surrenders
the slave by way of reparation, it is unjust that by the surrender of a
worthless slave the other owner should be free from liability; hence
suit can be brought against the latter also, and if in the attempt to
collect damages anything more is obtained, the plaintiff will be
entitled

to it after calculation of the value of the slave surrendered has been
made.

The joint-owners, however, should divide their claims in an action for
the division of common property in such a way that if the one who had
knowledge of the act should make payment, he will not be entitled to a
portion of all of it, but to a portion of the amount that the slave was
worth; and if the other paid anything, he will be entitled to credit for
his share. It is not just that the owner who ordered the slave to commit
the offence should obtain anything from his fellow-owner, since the loss
that he sustains is the result of his own misconduct.

\(1) Where several persons wish to bring a noxal action against me on
account of the same slave, or one party brings suit in several actions
with reference to the same slave, he being one in whom you have an
usufruct and I the mere ownership, it is part of the duty of the judge,
when I surrender the slave by way of reparation, to provide that I
transfer to the plaintiff the usufruct in him also; but I, as the mere
proprietor, can apply to the pr√¶tor to have him compel you to contribute
to the estimated damages in proportion to the value of the usufruct, or
to assign the usufruct, if this is more expedient. But if I, the mere
owner, refuse to defend the action brought with reference to the slave,
you should be permitted to defend it, and if, having lost it, you
deliver the slave, you will be protected against me.

\18. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVIII.*

A party who has an usufruct in a slave has for this reason a right of
action for theft against the mere owner, just as if he were any other
person, but no right of action exists against him although the slave is
in his service; and therefore, if judgment is rendered against the
owner, he will be discharged from liability by surrendering the slave to
the usufructuary.

\19. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII.*

Where a slave of Titius does some damage to property owned by you and me
in common, and we institute proceedings against Titius, a noxal action
under the *Lex Aquilia* will lie; and if he loses the suit he will be
compelled to surrender the entire slave to us separately. It may be
stated, however, as in the case where both the damage and the claim for
it are acquired by one person alone, either the money should be tendered
to both of us, or the slave be surrendered to both of us at the same
time by order of court. Nevertheless, if the slave is surrendered to
either of us without division of ownership, and on this account the
owner is released from liability to both of us, it is very properly held
that he to whom a surrender was made is liable to the other in an action
for the division of common property, to compel him to transfer a share
of the slave that was surrendered, since this is something which has
come into the hands of the joint-owner through property held in
common.^1^

^1^ There were two kinds of suits in partition at Civil Law, one was
called *Actio de communi dividendo*, the other *Actio famili√¶
erciscund√¶.* The first of these was employed for the division of
property owned in common, including that of part-

\(1) Where the mere owner of a slave leases the services of the latter
in whom someone else has the usufruct, the words of the Edict indicate
that if judgment is rendered against him he will have the choice of
surrendering the slave by way of reparation.

\(2) Where your slave has charge of a ship, and his underslave, who is
also a sailor on said ship, causes some damage, an action should be
granted against you, just as if the party in charge was free, and the
slave belonged to him; so that you will be ordered by the court to
surrender the said slave by way of reparation as part of the *peculium*
of your slave; although if the second slave committed the damage by
order of your slave or with his knowledge and sufferance, a noxal action
should be brought against you on account of your slave. The result will
be the same if your slave should order a sailor to commit the act.

\20. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

Where anyone brings several actions at different times, on account of
distinct offences, and he obtains ownership of the slave on account of
one of said offences, he will not be entitled to any other action
against the party who was formerly the owner, since a noxal action
follows the individual; but, if the owner at the time the former case
was tried, preferred to pay the damages assessed, he will, nevertheless,
be liable to the same plaintiff, or to anyone else, if he brings suit on
the ground of some other wrong.

\21. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

Whenever an owner is sued on the ground of damage committed, and does
not wish to defend the action, he is in such a condition that he must
surrender by way of reparation the slave on whose account he refuses to
defend the suit, or, if he does not do so, he is absolutely obliged to
make a defence; but judgment will not be rendered against him unless he
has the slave in his power, or has managed to relinquish possession of
him by fraud.

nership; the second could be brought by one heir against another for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of a will, as well as for the
partition of an estate. Both of these were considered as "mixed
actions," that is, they, in some respects, corresponded with proceedings
*in rem* as well as *in personam*, and could not be classed
distinctively under either head.

The *Actio de communi dividendo* was devised to supply the deficiencies
of the *Actio pro socio*, or partnership action, which was not
applicable to the division of the property belonging to the firm or
association, and, as a rule, had reference merely to the compulsory
payment of contributions.

The *Actio famili√¶ erciscund√¶* was available where a number of heirs
were at variance as to how an estate should be divided, and called for
its distribution; it being presumed that one of the heirs was, or had
been, in possession and had charge of the management of the estate. The
proceeding was of great antiquity and is referred to in the Laws of the
Twelve Tables (*Leges* XII *Tabululorum* V, IV.) It lay only in favor of
persons who were entitled to the unrestricted enjoy ment and control of
their property. The court was especially required to avoid, as far as
possible, rendering a decision which might in any way prejudice the
rights of the heirs, either in their relations to one another or to
strangers. If the distribution or settlement of several estates was
involved, they could all be included in one proceeding. ¬ó ED.

\(1) Where proceedings are instituted by a noxal action on account of
slaves, it is established that they can be defended even though they are
absent, but this only shall be done where the said slaves belong to the
defendant, for if they belong to another they must be present; and this
is also the case where any doubt exists whether they are the property of
the defendant or of another party. I think that this ought to be
understood to be the rule if it is proved that they are serving the
defendant merely as *bona fide *slaves, even if they are absent.

\(2) The Pr√¶tor says, "If he in whose power the slave is said to be
denies that he has him in his power, I shall either order him to swear
that the slave is not in his power, or that he has not fraudulently
maneged that he should not be, or I will grant an action without
surrender by way of reparation, whichever the plaintiff desires."

\(3) We should understand the words "In his power" to mean that the
defendant has the opportunity and the power to produce the slave; but if
the latter should be a fugitive, or out of the country, he will not be
held to be in his power.

\(4) If the defendant refuses to make oath, his position is the same as
that of a party who will neither defend an absent slave or produce him
in court; and persons of this kind should have judgment rendered against
them as being contumacious.

\(5) Where there is a guardian or a curator, he must swear that the
slave is not in the power of his owner; but where there is an agent, it
is necessary for the owner himself to be sworn.

\(6) Where the plaintiff has exacted an oath and the defendant has taken
it, and afterwards the plaintiff desires to bring a noxal action, it
should be considered whether an exception on the ground of "an oath
taken" should not be granted against the plaintiff? Sabinus is of the
opinion that it should not be granted, since the oath was taken with
reference to a different matter; that is to say, the party swore that
the slave was not in his power at the time, but now, since he is found
to be in his power, suit can be brought on account of his act.

Neratius, also, states that after the oath has been required, the
plaintiff can proceed omitting the surrender by way of reparation,
provided he claims that the defendant began to have the slave in his
power only after he was sworn.

\22. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XVIII.*

Where a slave is deposited with someone or loaned to him, a noxal action
can be brought against the owner, for the slave is understood to still
serve him, and as far as relates to this Edict, he is in his power; and
especially is this the case if he has the means of recovering him.

\(1) He who has received a slave in pledge or holds him by sufferance of
his owner is not liable in a noxal action, for even though parties may
have lawful possession, nevertheless, they have not possession as
owners; hence those slaves are understood to be in the power of their
owner, if the said owner has the means of recovering them.

\(2) What is the meaning of the words, "Has the means of recovering
them"? It signifies that he has the money by which to release

them, for he ought not to be compelled to sell his property in order to
pay the money and recover the slave.

\(3) Where an owner confesses that a slave is in his power he must
either produce him in court or defend him, if he is absent; and if he
does neither, he will be punished just as if the slave had been present
and he had not surrendered him.

\(4) Where the owner denies that the slave is in his power, the Pr√¶tor
permits the plaintiff to choose whether he will decide the matter by
means of an oath, or whether judgment shall be rendered without the
surrender of the slave; by which means he will succeed if he proves that
the slave is in the power of the defendant, or that he has acted
fraudulently so that he may not be; but a party who does not prove that
the slave is in the power of his adversary loses his case.

\23. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI.*

But if his adversary should afterwards come into possession of the
slave, he will be liable on account of the new possession and an
exception will be denied him.

\24. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XVIII.*

It must be considered whether a noxal action can be brought only against
the party who fraudulently managed to prevent the slave from being in
his power if it should happen through his fraud that a noxal action will
not be available; for instance, where he ordered his slave to take the
flight; or whether an action cannot, nevertheless, be brought against
some other party; which would be the case if the slave were sold or
manumitted? The latter is the better opinion, as in this instance the
plaintiff has the choice of proceeding against either party. Julianus,
however, says that if the manumitted slave is ready to defend his case,
an exception should be granted to the person who manumitted him; and
this is also the opinion of Labeo.

\25. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI.*

The rule is the same where the new owner of the slave is made defendant
in the suit.

\26. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XVIII.*

The choice of one defendant releases the other; for the Pr√¶tor
introduced this right to prevent the plaintiff from 6eing thwarted, and
not that he might obtain any profit; and therefore he will be barred by
an exception if he brings the other suit.

\(1) It follows as a result that where several persons fraudulently
manage to avoid having the slave in their power, the plaintiff must
select which one he would rather sue.

\(2) Again, if of several joint-owners, some, through malicious fraud,
relinquish possession of their shares; the plaintiff has the choice as
to whether he will proceed directly against the party who was in
possession, or whether he will bring a pr√¶torian action against him who
has ceased to be in possession.

\(3) Where a party answers in court that a slave who belongs to another
is his, then, if either one should pay, the other will be discharged.

\(4) If a slave of whom you have fraudulently relinquished possession
dies before this action is brought against you, you will be discharged
because this action takes the place of the direct one.

*We* hold that the case is different where you are in default in joining
issue.

\(5) An action will not be granted to an heir, or against an heir, on
the ground that the deceased stated what was false, nor against the
party himself, after the lapse of an indefinite time; for anyone is free
to assume the defence of an absent slave in order to avoid the penalty
prescribed by this Edict, that is to say, to be sued without the right
to surrender the slave by way of reparation. Therefore, if you deny that
the slave is in your power, you can afterwards confess that he is,
unless joinder of issue has already taken place in the case against you;
for then you ought not to be heard; as Labeo says.

Octavenus, however, says that you are entitled to relief even after
issue has been joined, if cause is shown, at all events if your age is
such that indulgence should be granted you.

\(6) Where a slave is taken away during the absence of his master, or
even in his presence, and matters are still in such a condition that
complete restitution is possible, a defence is permitted on account of
the slave that was taken away; for if a request was made for him to be
produced in court for the purpose of making a defence, the Pr√¶tor ought
to grant it.

The same relief should be afforded an usufructuary or one to whom the
slave was pledged on account of a debt, where the owner is present and
refuses to make a defence, in order that the malice or negligence of one
man may not injure others. The same relief must also be afforded where a
slave is held in common and one of his owners, who is present, refuses
to make a defence. In these instances the plaintiff is also entitled to
relief because it is established that the right of action is
extinguished by the acquisition of ownership; for when the slave is
removed by order of the Pr√¶tor, he becomes the property of the party who
led him away.

\27. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI.*

Where a noxal action is brought with reference to a slave who is held by
way of pledge, or with reference to one in whom another party has the
usufruct; we must remember that if either the creditor or the
usufructuary is present and is unwilling to undertake the defence, the
Proconsul must intervene, and refuse the sale of the pledge or an action
to be brought for the usufruct. In this instance it may be said that the
pledge is released by operation of law, since that is no pledge upon
which the money cannot be collected by suit; but an usufruct remains as
a matter of right, even though an action to recover it may be refused,
until the time established by law has elapsed, and it is lost by
non-user.

\(1) From what we have stated with reference to a slave who was held by
anyone in pledge, or a slave who is to be free upon a certain condition,
or one in whom another party has an usufruct; it is evident that where a
defendant states in court that his slave in reality belongs to another;
then, even though he is liable to a noxal action, he cannot,
nevertheless, be free from liability by operation of law through the
surrender of the slave by way of reparation; for as the party is not the
owner he cannot transfer the ownership to the plaintiff.

It is, however, certain, that where a slave has been delivered for this
reason, and his owner afterwards brings suit to recover him, but does
not tender the damages assessed in the case; he can be opposed by an
exception on the ground of malicious fraud.

\28. *Africanus, Questions, Book VI.*

Generally speaking, if I bring a noxal action against you on account of
the slave of a third party, who is serving you in good faith, and you
surrender him to me by way of reparation; and then if, while I am in
possession of him, his owner brings suit to recover him, I can bar him
with an exception on the ground of malicious fraud, unless he tenders
the damages which have been assessed; but if the owner himself should be
in possession, I am entitled to the Publician Action, and if the
defendant makes use of the exception, "Unless the defendant is his
owner," a replication based on malicious fraud can be interposed for my
benefit. In accordance with this I can acquire ownership by use,
although I am aware that I am in possession of the property of another,
and, in fact, if it had been otherwise established, the result would be
that a *bona fide* possessor would be subjected to the greatest
injustice; since while, as a matter of law, he would be liable in a
noxal action, the necessity is imposed upon him to submit to the payment
of the damages assessed in the case. The same principle applies where no
defence is made with reference to the slave, and I take him away by
order of the Pr√¶tor; since, in this instance also, I have a legal ground
of possession.

\29. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI.*

Not only can a person who has not the slave in his power refuse to
answer in a noxal action, but he is also free to avoid the action even
when he has him in his power, if he leaves the person undefended; but in
this instance he must transfer his right to the plaintiff, just as if
judgment had been rendered against him.

\30. *The Same, On the Edict of the Urban Pr√¶tor, Under the Head of the
"Prevention of Threatened Injury.*"

In noxal actions, the rights of those who are absent in good faith are
not lost, but, on their return, power is given them to make a defence in
accordance with what is proper and just, whether they are the owners or
have some right in the property in dispute, such as creditors and
usufructuaries.

\31. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book VII.*

Where the Pr√¶tor *says*, "When a number of slaves commit a theft an
action will only be granted to enable the plaintiff to obtain as much as
he would have done if a freeman had committed the crime," the question
arises whether this has reference to the payment of money as damages, or
to the surrender of the slave by way of reparation; as, for instance,
where double damages are collected out of the value of the slaves that
have been surrendered, whether other actions will be prohibited?

Sabinus and Cassius both think that the defendant should be credited
with the value of the slaves surrendered. This Pomponius approves, and
it is true; for if a slave is taken away because no defence was offered,
the owner must receive credit for what he was worth. Julianus thinks
that it is certain that an account must be taken, not only of the double
damages, but also of what might be recovered by a personal action; and
where theft has been committed by a number of slaves, the time when this
was done must be investigated, in order to determine whether they
belonged to the same band; for the Edict is not applicable where those
slaves who belong to different owners afterwards becomes the property of
one alone.

\32. *Callistratus, Monitory Edict, Book II.*

Where the slave is in the power of one who is not his owner, and is said
to have committed an offence, if he is not defended he will be taken
away; and if his owner is present, he should deliver him up and give
security against malicious fraud.

\33. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIV.*

No one can, against his will, be forced to defend another in a noxal
action, but he must be deprived of him whom he refuses to defend, if he
is his slave; but where the party who is in the power of another is
free, he ought to be permitted to defend himself under all circumstances
:

\34. *Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book IV.*

For whenever no one will undertake the defence of the son of a family on
account of a breach of the law, an action is granted against him,

\35. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.*

And if judgment is rendered against the son he must comply with it, for
he is held by the decision. Moreover, it must be stated that his father
also is liable to an action *De peculio*, after judgment has been
pronounced against the son.

\36. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.*

Where anyone purchases from a debtor a slave who has been pledged and
then stolen by him, the purchaser will be liable on the ground of theft,
after he has acquired the ownership of the slave; and

no objection can be made that the slave can be recovered by him, by
means of the Servian Action. The rule is the same where a party makes a
purchase from a minor under twenty-five years of age, or knowingly for
the purpose of defrauding creditors; as, although the latter can be
deprived of their ownership, still, in the meantime, suit can be brought
against them.

\37. *Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XV.*

Where a slave belonging to another steals my property and afterwards
comes into my hands as owner, the right of action for theft to which I
was entitled is extinguished, if it has not yet been made use of; and if
I should afterwards dispose of the slave whom I bought before issue was
joined, the right of action for theft will not be renewed; but if I
purchase him after issue has been joined, the vendor can have judgment
rendered against him:

\38. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.*

Just as he would if he had sold him to another party, for, indeed, it
makes little difference to whom he sells him, whether to his adversary
or to someone else; and it will be his own fault if he has to submit to
the payment of the damages assessed, since by selling him he deprived
himself of the power of surrendering him by way of reparation.

\(1) Julianus, however, states in the Twenty-second Book of the Digest,
that if I abandon the slave who stole your property, I am released from
liability, because he at once ceased to belong to me; otherwise an
action for theft could be brought on account of him who has no owner.

\(2) Where my slave steals your property and sells it, and you deprive
him of the money in his possession which he obtained as part of the
price of said property, there will be ground for an action of theft on
both sides; for you can bring a noxal action of theft against me on
account of the slave, and I can bring one against you on account of the
money.

\(3) Moreover, where I pay money to the slave of my creditor in order
that he may give it to his master, there will also be ground for an
action of theft, if the slave appropriates the money he received.

\39. *Julianus, Digest, Book IX.*

Where a slave belonging to several persons commits a theft and all his
owners fraudulently manage to avoid having him in their power, the
Pr√¶tor ought to follow the form of the civil action, and allow the
equitable action which he promises in an instance of this kind to be
brought against whichever owner the plaintiff may select; and he should
not afford the plaintiff any greater advantage than to enable him to
bring an action, without the defendant having the right to surrender the
slave by way of reparation; since he would have been able to institute
proceedings in a noxal action if the slave had been produced in court.

\(1) Where anyone acknowledges that a slave is his own who really
belongs to another; then, although he is liable to a noxal action,
never-

theless, where proper cause is shown, he can be compelled to give
security; but where a party is sued on account of his own slave, he
should not be burdened with security, as he is not volunteering in the
defence of a slave belonging to another.

\(2) Where anyone states that the owner of a slave had acted
fraudulently to avoid having said slave in his possession, and the owner
contends in court that the suit should be defended by someone else who
would furnish security; there is ground here for an exception on the
ground of malicious fraud.

\(3) But if, after issue has been joined with the owner, the slave
should appear, and because he was not defended is taken away; the owner
will be discharged if he interposes an exception on the ground of
malicious fraud.

\(4) Where, however, the slave dies before issue is joined, the owner
will not be held liable in this action at all.

\40. *The Same, Digest, Book XXII.*

Where a slave is bequeathed as a legacy and steals the property of the
future heir before the estate is entered upon; the heir can bring an
action of theft against the legatee if he accepts the legacy. But where
the same slave appropriates property which belongs to the estate, an
action of theft will not lie, because there can be no theft of property
of this description; but an action can be brought to compel him to
produce the property in court.

\41. *The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book II.*

Where a slave owned in common causes unlawful damage to one of his
owners, an action under the *Lex Aquilia* will not lie on that account;
because if he had caused the damage to a stranger, an action could be
brought against the other joint-owner for the entire amount under the
*Lex Aquilia; *just as where a slave owned in common committed theft an
action for theft cannot be brought against the other joint-owner, but
proceedings in partition must be instituted.

\42. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.*

Where a party, on account of whom issue has been joined in a noxal
action, claims his freedom, proceedings should be stayed until his
condition is determined; hence if he should be declared to be a slave,
the noxal action will proceed, but if he is decided to be free it will
be held to be of no effect.

\(1) Where a party undertakes to defend a noxal action on account of a
slave who is dead, and he is ignorant of the fact, he should be
discharged from liability, because it has ceased to be true that he
should surrender anything on account of said slave.

\(2) These actions are not barred by lapse of time, and are available as
long as we have the power of surrendering the slave; for they can be
brought not only against us but also against our successors, as well as
against the successors of the party liable in the first place, not
because they succeed to his liability, but on the ground of

ownership. Hence, if a slave has come into the hands of another party,
his new owner can be sued in a noxal action on the ground of ownership.

\43. *Pomponius, Epistles, Book VIII.*

Slaves, in cases where liability for reparation follows the individual,
should be defended in the place where it is alleged that they committed
the offence, and therefore the owner is obliged to produce said slaves
in the place where they are said to have committed the violence and he
may lose the ownership of all of them if he does not defend them.
