BOOK XVII.
TITLE I.  CONCERNING THE ACTION ON MANDATE AND THE COUNTER ACTION, 303
TITLE II. CONCERNING THE ACTION ON PARTNERSHIP, 333



THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XVII.
TITLE I.
CONCERNING THE ACTION ON MANDATE AND THE COUNTER ACTION.


1. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

The obligation of mandate is based upon the consent of the contracting
parties.

(1) Hence a mandate can be received by means of a messenger, as

well as by a letter.

(2) Moreover, an action on mandate will lie where the party either says
I ask, or I wish, or I direct, or where he puts it in writing in any
other language whatsoever.

(3) The obligation of mandate can also be contracted to become
operative at a certain time, and under a certain condition.

(4) A mandate is void unless it is gratuitous, as it derives its origin
from duty and friendship, hence compensation is opposed to duty; for,
where money is involved, the transaction rather has reference to leasing
and hiring.

2. *Gaius, Diurnal or Golden Matters, Book II.*

The obligation of mandate is contracted between us whether I entrust you
only with my business, or whether I charge you only with that of another
party, or with his along with mine, or with my business and yours or
with yours and that of another. Where I direct you to attend to a matter
which concerns you alone, the mandate is superfluous, and no obligation
whatever arises from it.

(1) A mandate only has reference to an affair of mine where, for
instance, I direct you to transact my business, or to purchase a tract
of land for me, or to become my surety.

(2) It only has reference to the affairs of another where, for example,
I direct you to transact the business of Titius, or to purchase a tract
of land for him, or to become his surety.

(3) It has reference to my affairs and those of another, where, for
example, I direct you to transact the business of Titius and myself, or
to purchase a tract of land for myself and Titius, or to become surety

for him.

(4) It has reference to your affairs and mine where, for instance, I
direct you to lend money at interest to someone who is negotiating

a loan on my account.

(5) It has reference to your affairs and those of another, where, for
instance, I direct you to lend money at interest to Titius, but if I
direct you to lend it to him without interest, the obligation of mandate
is only contracted in favor of a third party.

(6) The obligation of mandate is only contracted in favor of you,
where, for instance, I direct you to rather spend your money for the
purchase of land than to lend it at interest; or, on the other hand, to
rather lend it at interest than to invest it in land. A charge of this
kind is, properly speaking, rather advice than a mandate, and on this
account it is not obligatory, for the reason that no one is bound by
advice, even though it may not be beneficial to the party to whom it is
given; because every one is free to investigate whether the advice will
be advantageous to him or not.

3. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

Moreover, in the case of mandate, it happens that sometimes the
condition of the party giving it may not be improved, and sometimes when
it may be improved, but it can never become worse.

(1) In fact, if I directed you to purchase something for me, and did
not say anything about the price, and you purchase the article, there
will be a right of action on both sides.

(2) If I fixed the price, and you bought the article for more, certain
authorities deny that you will be entitled to an action on mandate, even
though you are ready to pay the amount of the excess; for it is unjust
that I should have an action against you if you were unwilling to make
the payment, but that you should have one against me if you are willing
to do so.

4. *Gaius, Diurnal or Golden Matters, Book II.*

Proculus, however, thinks that he can bring an action for the amount of
the established price; and this opinion is indeed the more indulgent
one.

5. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

Therefore, the limits of the mandate must be diligently observed, for a
party who exceeds them is held to have done something else than what he
was directed to do.

(1) And if he does not execute what he undertook, he will be liable.

(2) Hence, if I direct you to buy the house of Seius for a hundred
*aurei*, and you buy that of Titius for a much larger price, or for a
hundred *aurei*, or even for a smaller sum; you will not be held to have
executed the mandate.

(3) Again, if I direct you to sell my land for a hundred *aurei, *and
you sell it for ninety, and I bring an action to recover the land, I
will not be barred by an exception, unless you pay me the balance which
is lacking on the mandate, and indemnify me for all loss.

(4) Moreover, if a master directs his slave to sell property for a
certain amount, and he sells it for less, the master can also bring an
action to recover it; nor will he be barred by an exception, unless he
is indemnified.

(5) The position of the mandator can be improved, for example, if I
direct you to purchase Stichus for ten *aurei*, and you purchase him for
less, or for the same amount and receive some accession to the

slave; as, in either instance, you have made the purchase not for more
than the price agreed upon, but within that price.

6. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

If an honor is bestowed by way of remuneration, an action on mandate
will lie.

(1) Where anyone has been directed to transact certain business, he can
be sued by means of this action, and proceedings on the ground of
voluntary agency cannot properly be instituted against him, for he is
only bound to the extent that he transacted the business; but in this
instance, because he accepted the mandate he will be liable, even if he
did not transact the business.

(2) Where I permitted anyone to become my surety, or to intervene in
any other way for my benefit, I am liable to an action on mandate. And,
unless a party bound himself for another who was unwilling that he
should do so, or with the intention of making him a present, or of
transacting his business, an action on mandate will lie.

(3) There can be no mandate of a dishonorable transaction, and
therefore proceedings cannot be instituted by this action.

(4) If I direct you to attend to something with which I have no
concern, as, for instance, to become surety for Seius, or to make a loan
to Titius, I will have a right of action on mandate, as Celsus states in
the Seventh Book of the Digest, and I will be liable to you.

(5) It is evident that if I direct you to do something in which you are
interested the action on mandate will not lie, unless I, also, have an
interest in the matter; or, if you would not have transacted the
business unless I had directed you to do so, even if I had no interest
in it, an action on mandate will, nevertheless, be available.

(6) The question is asked by Julianus in the Thirteenth Book of the
Digest, whether, if a principal directs his agent to take a certain sum
of money and lend it at interest at his risk, provided he pays the said
principal certain interest, and the agent can lend it at a higher rate,
he himself will be entitled to the profit; for, as Julianus says, he is
held to have received the money as a loan.

It is evident, however, that if he was charged with the administration
of the entire business he would also be liable to an action on mandate,
just as a debtor who transacts the business of his creditor, is
ordinarily held liable to an action on mandate.

(7) A certain Marius Paulus became surety for a party named Daphnis,
and it was agreed that he should be compensated for doing so. It was
also provided that a certain sum of money should be paid to him, under
another name, in case of a favorable termination of the suit. He was
ordered by Claudius Saturninus, the Prætor, to pay a much greater amount
than that above mentioned, and the same Saturninus forbade him to appear
in court as an advocate. It seemed to me that he had given security for
the payment of the judgment, and that he appeared as the purchaser of
the suit, and Marius Paulus seemed to desire that an action on mandate
should be brought against Daphnis for the amount for which judgment has
been rendered against him.

The Divine Brothers, however, most properly stated in a Rescript that,
on account of his deceitful conduct, he was not entitled to an action,
because he had agreed, for a pecuniary compensation, to assume the
responsibility. On the other hand, Marcellus says with reference to the
party who had made a promise in consideration of the money that if, in
fact, the intention was to bind himself at his own risk, he could not
bring an action, but if this was not the intention, a prætorian action
could more properly be brought. This opinion seems to conform to the
public welfare.

7. *Papinianus, Opinions, Book II.*

Where an attorney is appointed to conduct a case, and demands a larger
fee, it must be considered whether his client desired to remunerate him
for his services, and, in this instance, he must comply with what had
been agreed upon; or whether the attorney had purchased the right of
action with the expectation of realizing a larger sum of money, which is
contrary to good morals.

8. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

If I appoint an attorney, and he does not return to me the documents
relating to the case, in what action will he be liable to me? Labeo
thinks that he will be liable to an action on mandate, and that the
opinion of those who think that on this ground an action on deposit can
be brought, is not the correct one; for the origin of every contract and
its cause should always be taken into consideration.

(1) But where the adversary of the attorney is released through
collusion, the latter will be liable to an action on mandate; but if the
attorney is not solvent, then he says that an action on the ground of
fraud should be granted against the party who was released through
collusion.

(2) It is established that where an attorney does not proceed with a
case which he undertook to conduct, he is liable to an action on
mandate.

(3) Where one person directs another to transact the business of him
who himself had charged him to do so, he will be entitled to an action
on mandate, because he himself is also liable; for, although it is
commonly stated that one attorney cannot appoint another before issue is
joined, still an action on mandate will lie, for he can only do this for
the purpose of conducting the case.

(4) Where certain guardians directed their fellow-guardian to purchase
a slave for their ward, and he does not do so, will an action on mandate
be available? And will one on mandate only lie, or can one also be
brought on guardianship? Julianus makes a distinction here, as he says
that the kind of slave which the guardians directed one of their number
to purchase should be taken into consideration, for if the slave was
superfluous, or even burdensome, the guardian will be liable only to an
action on mandate, and not to one on guardianship.

Where, however, the slave was necessary, he will then be liable to an
action on guardianship, and not only himself but the others as well;

for if they did not direct him to make the purchase, they will be liable
to an action on guardianship, for the reason that they did not purchase
a slave who was necessary for their ward; they are therefore not
released for having commissioned their fellow guardian, because they
should have made the purchase themselves. It is evident that they will,
nevertheless, be entitled to an action on mandate, because the mandate
was not complied with.

Julianus also says that, on the other hand, a guardian who makes a
purchase, will be entitled to an action on mandate against his
fellow-guardians.

(5) Where a man who is free and is serving as a slave in good faith,
directs Titius to buy him, and gives him money from his *peculium* for
that purpose, which *peculium* should follow him, and ought to be left
in the hands of a *bona fide* purchaser; and Titius, after the price was
paid, manumitted the freeman who subsequently was judicially declared to
have been born free; Julianus says he will be entitled to an action on
mandate against the party whom he directed to buy him; but that all he
can gain in this action on mandate will be to compel the party to
transfer to him the rights of action which he possesses against him from
whom he purchased the slave.

It is evident that, if he gave him money derived from the *peculium
*belonging to a *bona fide* purchaser, he cannot transfer any rights of
action to him (so Julianus says), because he has none, since the
purchaser gave him his money; and he says further that he is bound on
account of the sale, and this action is of no effect, for the reason
that whatever he recovered he would have to make good in an action on
sale.

(6) The action on mandate will then lie when the interest of the person
who gave it begins to exist, but if he has no interest, the action will
be inoperative, for it will lie only to the extent of his interest; as,
for instance, where I directed you to purchase a tract of land for me,
since, if I had an interest in making the purchase, you will be liable,
but if I myself purchased the same land or another party did so for me,
as I have no interest, the action on mandate will not be available.

I ordered you to transact my business, but even though no one transacted
it, if no loss resulted, an action will not lie, but if someone else
transacted the business properly, the action on mandate will not be
available. This same rule is applicable in similar cases.

(7) Where sureties, who were not aware that their debtor had made
payment, or had been released by means of a receipt, or under an
agreement, have again paid the claim due from the debtor, they will not
be liable to an action on mandate.

(8) This also applies to the action to which the surety is entitled,
which can be ascertained from a Rescript of the Divine Brothers,
addressed to Catullus Julianus as follows: "If the parties who have
become your sureties have judgment rendered against them for a larger
amount than the debt claimed; and if they, being intelligent and
informed of the facts, neglected to take an appeal, you can protect
your-

self by having recourse to the equity of the court, if they bring an
action on mandate."

Therefore, if they were ignorant of the facts, their ignorance is
excusable, but if they were aware of them, it was incumbent upon them to
take an appeal, and they were guilty of bad faith in not doing so. But
what if they were prevented by poverty? Their indigence should then be
their excuse, but if they had made an agreement with the principal
debtor, in the presence of witnesses, that he should take an appeal if
he thought it was advisable, I am of the opinion that they have acted
properly.

(9) He is held to have acted in bad faith who does not return what he
has the power to restore.

(10) Hence, if I directed you to purchase a slave, and you did so, you
will be liable for his delivery. But if you fraudulently neglected to
purchase him, (or, perhaps, having received money for that purpose, you
gave it to another that he might make the purchase) or if you were
guilty of gross neglect (for instance, if induced by favor, you should
permit another to purchase him) you will be liable. If, however, the
slave whom you purchased should run away, you will be responsible, if
this occurred through your bad faith. But if neither bad faith or
negligence existed, you will not be liable except to the extent that you
must furnish security to deliver up the slave if he should come into
your power. But if you should deliver him up, you must give me
possession of him; and if security is furnished against his recovery by
eviction, or you have a right to ask that security should be furnished
to you, I think that it will be sufficient if you assign this right of
action to me, so that you may appoint me your agent to act in my own
affairs, and you will not be obliged to make good any more than you
actually will obtain.

9. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

You should also furnish security with reference to your acts.

10. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

The same rule also applies to real-property, where the agent purchases a
tract of land; for the party who appointed him is not responsible for
anything more than good faith.

(1) Where, however, security is given to the agent with reference to
the health of a slave, or such security can be given, or where it is
done with reference to other defects, the same rule will apply; or the
party will have judgment rendered against him, if, through negligence,
he does not provide for security.

(2) Where crops are gathered from land which my agent has purchased for
me, it is the duty of the judge to compel these also to be made good.

(3) Where my agent has money belonging to me in his hands, he will owe
me interest from the date of his default in paying it. Where, however,
he has lent money on interest, and has collected the interest, we hold,
in consequence, that he is obliged to make good any profit

which he has obtained from it; whether I directed him to lend said money
or not, because it is required by good faith that he should not profit
by the property of another.

If, however, he did not make use of the money, but appropriated it for
his own use, he can be sued for the interest at the legal rate customary
in that district. Finally, Papinianus says that, even if the agent
should collect interest and appropriate it for his own use, he

must make it good.

(4) If anyone should direct Titius to borrow money from those who
employ him, an action on mandate cannot be brought against him, (as
Papinianus states in the Third Book of Opinions) because he is liable on
account of the loan, and therefore he cannot be sued for interest as it
were on the ground of mandate, if this was not expressly set forth in
the stipulation.

(5) Papinianus also says in the same Book that, where a surety who
assumed responsibility because his principal directed him as his agent
to borrow the money, has judgment rendered against him; an equitable
action in the nature of an institorian proceeding should be granted,
because he may be held, as it were, to have appointed him for the
purpose of making the loan.

(6) Where I direct anyone to stipulate for a sum from Titius, I can
bring an action on mandate against the party whom I directed to do this,
in order to compel him to release him, if I desire to do so; or, if I
prefer, I can bring an action to compel him to make a substitution to
me, or to anyone else that I may wish.

Papinianus states in the same Book that, if a mother gives a dowry in
behalf of her daughter, and then, under the direction of her daughter,
makes a stipulation at that time, or even afterwards; she will be liable
to an action on mandate, although she herself is the one who

gave the dowry.

(7) Where anyone asserts that the business which he has directed his
agent and his slave to transact will only be ratified if Sempronius is
present when this is done, and a bad debt should be contracted,
Sempronius, who was not guilty of fraud, will not be liable; and it is
true that he who attends to the affairs of another without the intention
of acting as an agent, but solely through motives of affection and
friendship, for the purpose of advising agents and stewards and
directing them by his counsel, is not liable to an action on mandate;
but if he should be guilty of bad faith, he will be liable, not to an
action of mandate, but to one on the ground of fraud.

(8) If I direct my agent to lend my money to Titius without interest,
and he does not lend it to him without interest, let us examine whether
he should refund the interest to me? Labeo states that he should refund
it, even though I directed him to lend the money without interest;
although if he lent the money at his own risk, Labeo says that an action
to recover the interest will not lie.

(9) Labeo also says, and it is correct, that this action also permits
reimbursement, and as a party who acts as agent is required to deliver

the crops, he can also deduct any expense which he may have incurred in
gathering them; but if he expended anything for transportation while he
was going over the land, I think that such expense should also be made
good to him, unless he was employed on a salary, and it was agreed that
he shall pay his own expenses on journeys of this kind, that is to say,
he should pay them out of his salary.

(10) He also says that if an agent incurs any expense for the sake of
pleasure, outside his mandate, his principal should permit him to remove
the object for which it was incurred, if this can be done without injury
to him, unless the principal wishes him to be accountable for said
expense.

(11) Sureties and mandataries are entitled to an action on mandate,
even though they have made payment without the institution of judicial
proceedings.

(12) Julianus says that, generally speaking, if a surety has neglected
to interpose an exception which was a personal one, and of which the
principal debtor could not avail himself, he will still be entitled to
an action on mandate; if, indeed, the exception could not have been
honorably employed. If he did this knowingly in a case in which the
principal debtor could have made use of the proceeding, he will not be
entitled to an action on mandate, provided that he had the power of
settling the matter, and of asking the party whether he preferred to
undertake the defence of the case in his own behalf, or by means of an
attorney.

(13) Where a receipt is given by a creditor to a surety by way of gift,
I think that if the creditor desired to remunerate the surety, the
latter would be entitled to an action on mandate; and much more would
this be the case if the creditor gave him the receipt on account of
death, or bequeathed him a release.

11. *Pomponius, On Plautius, Book III.*

If I should subsequently become the heir of a party in whose favor
judgment has been rendered against me on account of security, I will be
entitled to an action on mandate.

12. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

If, however, not for the sake of remuneration, but mainly as a gift, a
creditor dismisses the suit against a surety, the latter will not be
entitled to an action against the debtor.

(1) Marcellus, however, holds that where anyone, with the intention of
making a gift to a surety, pays a creditor in his behalf, the surety
will be entitled to an action on mandate.

(2) It is evident, he says, that where a son under paternal control or
a slave is the surety, and I make payment for him, I give him a present;
and neither the father nor the master can bring an action on mandate.
This is the case because the party who made the payment did not intend
to make a donation to the father.

(3) It is clear that if a servant, who is a surety, should pay the
creditor, his master will be entitled to an action on mandate.

(4) Marcellus also says, in the same place, that where a son under
paternal control became security without the authority of his father, an
action on mandate will not lie, if there is nothing in the *peculium;*
but if he became security by the order of his father, or payment was
made out of the *peculium*, there is still more reason that his father
should be entitled to an action on mandate.

(5) If I directed a son under paternal control to make payment for me,
Neratius says that his father would be entitled to an action on mandate,
whether he himself made payment, or his son did so out of the *peculium,
*and this is reasonable, for it makes no difference to me who pays my
debts.

(6) If I direct a son under paternal control to make payment for me,
and he does so after being emancipated, it is true that an action *in
factum *should be granted to the son, but the father will be entitled to
an action on the ground of voluntary agency, if he pays after the
emancipation of his son.

(7) They proceed by the counter action who have accepted the mandate;
as, for instance, those who have undertaken the agency of matters in
general, or of a single transaction.

(8) Hence Papinianus asks whether a patron who has bought a tract of
land and paid two thirds of the purchase-money, and ordered the said
land to be delivered to his freedman, so that he may pay the remainder,
and, after this has been done, and the freedman has consented that the
land shall be sold by the patron, can the freedman recover the third of
the purchase-money? He says if the freedman accepted the mandate in the
beginning, he did not receive a gift, and he can recover the third of
the purchase-money by means of the counter action after having deducted
the profits which he had collected in the meantime; but if the patron
bestowed this as a gift upon his freedman, the latter will be held to
have afterwards donated it to his patron.

(9) If you have directed me to purchase something for you, and I
purchase it with my own money, I will be entitled to an action against
you to recover the price of the same; but if I pay for it with your
money, and there is still some *bona fide* balance due for the purchase
of the article, or if you refuse to receive it after it has been bought,
the contrary action on mandate will lie.

The case will be similar if you direct me to do anything else, and I
incur expense for that purpose; for I can not only recover the amount
which I have disbursed but also interest on the same. The interest,
moreover, should not only begin to run from the time of the default, but
the judge should also make an estimate of the expense, if a party
demands payment from his debtor and the latter pays, where he obtains a
very high rate of interest (for it is perfectly just that reason should
be considered in matters of this kind), or where the debtor himself has
borrowed money at a high rate of interest and

pays it.

If, however, the agent did not release the principal debtor from the
payment of interest, but the interest itself is lost; or if he released

him from a low rate of interest, and, in order to execute his trust,
received a higher rate; I have no doubt that he can recover the interest
by an action on mandate, and, (as has already been determined) a judge
should decide all this in accordance with the principles of equity and
good faith.

(10) I gave you money in order that you might pay my creditor, you did
not do so, and you will owe me interest; in this instance, my creditor
can recover the money due from me with interest, as was stated by the
Emperor Severus in a Rescript directed to Hadrianus Demonstratus.

(11) If a dissolute young man directs you to become security for a
harlot, and you, having knowledge of her character, undertake to carry
out the mandate, you will not be entitled to an action on mandate;
because the case is similar to the one where you lend money to a party
being well aware that he will lose it. But if he still further directly
charges you to lend money to a harlot, you will not be bound by the
mandate, as it was given contrary to good faith.

(12) Where a certain man wrote a letter to his friend as follows: "I
ask you to consider Sextilius Crescens, my friend, as recommended to
you," he will not be liable to the action of mandate, because the letter
was written rather for the purpose of recommending the man than on
account of the mandate.

(13) Where one party directs another to lend money to a son under
paternal control, the latter should not be considered as borrowing it in
violation of the Decree of the Senate; but, for the reason that the
father will be liable either to an action on the *peculium*, or for
money expended for his own benefit, or on the ground of an act performed
by his order, the mandate will be valid.

I further say, that if I should be in doubt as to whether he was
accepting the loan in opposition to the Decree of the Senate, or not,
and I refuse to lend him the money in violation of the Decree of the
Senate, and someone should then appear who alleges that this is not the
case, and he also says to the creditor, "Make the loan at my risk, you
will make a good loan." I think that there is ground for a mandate, and
that the party will be liable to the action.

(14) If I direct the creditor to make a loan after the money has
already been lent; Papinianus says, very properly, that there is no
mandate. It is evident that if I direct you to grant a delay to the
debtor, in order that you may wait and not urge him to payment, and I
state that the money will be at my risk; I think it is true that the
entire risk of the claim should attach to the party giving the mandate.

(15) He also says that if a guardian directs that an obligation which
he has incurred shall be accepted or approved, he will be liable to an
action of mandate, that is, to one who has been his ward, or to his
curator.

(16) If I direct money to be collected, and then change my mind, can an
action on mandate be brought against me or against my heir? Marcellus
says that the action on mandate will not lie, because the

mandate is extinguished by the change of mind. If, however, you direct
the money to be collected, and then forbid this to be done, and it is,
nevertheless, collected; the debtor will be released.

(17) Marcellus also says that if anyone directs a monument to be
erected to himself after his death, his heir can proceed in an action on
mandate. But if the party who received the mandate erected the monument
with his own money, I think that he can bring an action on mandate, even
if he was not charged to erect the monument with his own money; for the
action will also lie in his favor against him who directed him to employ
his own money in constructing the monument, and especially is this the
case if he had already made preparations for that purpose.

13. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.*

The rule is the same if I have directed you to purchase a tract of land
from my heirs after my death.

14. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

There is no doubt that the heir of a surety is entitled to an action on
mandate, if he has made payment. If, however, he has sold the estate,
and the purchaser has made payment, the question arises, will he be
entitled to an action on mandate? Julianus says, in the Thirteenth Book,
that the heir can bring such an action, because he is liable to be sued
on the ground of purchase, to compel him to assign his rights of action,
and therefore an action on purchase will lie, since he has the power to
do so.

(1) Where a surety leaves two heirs, and one of them purchases the
estate from his co-heir, and then pays to the stipulator all that the
deceased became surety for, he can hold his co-heir liable either on the
stipulation, or on the purchase. He will therefore be entitled to an
action of mandate.

15. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.*

If I direct you to purchase a tract of land, and afterwards write to you
not to do so, and you have made the purchase before you learned that I
had countermanded it; I will be liable to you in an action on mandate,
because he who undertook to execute the mandate should not suffer loss.

16. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

If anyone should direct me to incur some expense on my own property, and
I do so, the question arises whether an action on mandate will lie.
Celsus says, in the Seventh Book of the Digest, that he gave the
following opinion, when Aurelius Quietus is said to have directed a
physician with whom he lodged, to build, at his own expense, a
tennis-court, a hot bath, and other buildings for his health in the
gardens which he had at Ravenna, to which he was accustomed to repair
every year.

Celsus therefore held, that, after having deducted whatever had a
tendency to render his buildings more valuable, an action on mandate
could be brought against him to recover the balance.

17. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.*

If I direct you to collect ten *aurei* from Titius, and before they are
collected, I bring an action on mandate against you, and you collect 
the amount before the case is decided; it is established that judgment
should be rendered against you.

18. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XL.*

Where anyone allows himself to be directed by another to lend him money,
he is understood to have received a mandate.

19. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLIII.*

If my slave directs someone to purchase him in order that he may be
ransomed; Pomponius very aptly discusses the question whether he who has
ransomed the slave voluntarily, can bring an action against the vendor
to compel him to take him back; since the action of mandate is a
reciprocal one. Pomponius says, however, that it is most unjust to
compel me to take back a slave on account of the act of said slave, whom
I wish to dispose of permanently; nor should I be liable to an action of
mandate in this instance, any more than if I had sold him to you.

20. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XL*

He who has undertaken to carry out a mandate cannot profit to any extent
on account of it; just as he ought not to suffer any loss if he could
not collect money lent at interest.

(1) An action on the ground of business transacted may be brought by a
surety if he bound himself for a party who was absent, for an action on
mandate will not lie when the mandate did not precede it.

21. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLVII.*

If I become surety for you by the direction of another, I cannot bring
an action on mandate against you, just as happens when someone makes a
promise having in view the mandate of another. But if I do this with
reference, not to the mandate of one person but to that of two, I will
also be entitled to an action of mandate against you, just as, if two
parties had directed me to lend you money, I would be entitled to an
action against both.

22. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

If I direct you to become surety for me for a certain time, and you do
so absolutely, and make payment; the proper answer will be that you will
not be entitled to an action on mandate until the time has expired.

(1) It has also been discussed whether, if you become security by my
direction for a certain time, for a sum which I owed during that time,
and you pay it before the period has elapsed, will you at once be
entitled to an action on mandate? Certain authorities think that the
right of action is immediately acquired, but for less than the amount of
my interest in having payment made on the day when it was due. It is
better, however, to say that, in the meantime, the action on man-

date for this sum cannot be brought, when it is not convenient for me to
pay it before the appointed time.

(2) It happens, sometimes, that if I transact my own business I will
also be entitled to a prætorian action on mandate; for instance, where
my debtor substitutes one of his own in my favor at his own risk, or
where I institute proceedings against the principal debtor at the
request of the surety; for although I am collecting my own debt, still,
I am transacting his business, and therefore what I fail to collect I
can recover by an action on mandate.

(3) Where persons, whose property has been given in pledge and sold,
introduce fraudulent purchasers, and direct them to buy the property,
the mandate is understood to have been given, although a mandate does
not exist under circumstances of this kind; because, when you buy your
own property, such a purchase is null and void.

(4) Julianus said that the obligation of mandate also has reference to
the property of him who undertook its performance, and, on this account,
should by all means, be proved; because if I direct one of several
heirs, who are making a sale, to purchase for me the property of the
estate, the said heir will be liable to an action on mandate for the
share of the estate to which he is entitled, and the obligation will be
reciprocal; for, in fact, if he, on this account, (that is, because he
has undertaken the performance of the mandate) will not surrender the
property to another bidder, good faith requires that he should pay him
the price for which it could be sold.

On the other hand, if the purchaser was not present at the sale for the
purpose of buying property which he needed, as he had instructed the
heir to purchase it for him; it will be perfectly just that he should
have an action on mandate to indemnify himself for the interest he had
in having the property purchased.

(5) A person whose property has been confiscated can direct anyone to
purchase it, and if he should do so, an equitable action on mandate will
lie, if he does not keep faith. This rule has been established because,
where property has been confiscated and anything is afterwards acquired,
it does not go to the Treasury.

(6) Where anyone has undertaken to carry out a mandate directing him to
rob a temple, or wound or kill a man, he cannot recover anything in an
action on mandate, on account of the infamous nature of the mandate.

(7) If I give you a hundred *aurei* in order that you may give them to
Titius, and you do not do so, but use them yourself; Proculus says that
you will be liable both to an action on mandate, and to one of theft;
but if I should give them to you in such a way that you can turn them
over to anyone you please, only an action on mandate will lie.

(8) If I direct your slave to pay, on my account, a sum of money which
I owe you; Neratius says that, although the slave may have borrowed the
money and entered the payment on your books as having been received from
me, still, if he did not receive it from the creditor to be placed to my
credit, I will not be released, and you cannot bring

an action on mandate against me; but if he borrowed it with the
understanding that he was to pay it on my account, on the other hand
both these circumstances will take place; for it makes no difference
whether some other slave, or the same one, received the money to be paid
on my account in your name, and this is the more correct, since whenever
the creditor receives his own money, the release of the debtor does not
occur.

(9) A fugitive slave of mine, while in the hands of a thief, obtained
some money and purchased other slaves with it, whom Titius received by
delivery from the vendor. Mela says that I can cause Titius to make
restitution to me by an action on mandate, because my slave is held to
have directed Titius to receive the slaves by delivery, provided that he
did so at the request of the slave. But if the vendor made the delivery
to Titius without his consent, I can then bring an action on purchase to
compel the vendor to deliver the slaves to me, and the vendor will have
a personal action for recovery against Titius for the delivery of slaves
which he did not owe him, although he believed that he did.

(10) Where the curator of property makes a sale, but does not pay the
proceeds of the same to the creditors, Trebatius, Ofilius, and Labeo are
of the opinion that an action on mandate will lie against him in favor
of those creditors who appear, and that an action on the ground of
business transacted can be brought by those creditors who are absent;
but if, having executed the mandate of those who are present, he
proceeds with the sale, an action on the ground of business transacted
cannot be brought by the absent creditors, unless perhaps against those
who directed the curator to sell the property, just as if they had
transacted the business of the former. But if they directed him to do
this, believing that they were the only creditors, an action *in factum
*should be granted in favor of the absent creditors against those who
gave the mandate.

(11) However, just as one is free not to accept a mandate, so if it is
accepted it must be executed, unless it is revoked. Moreover, it can be
revoked in such a way that the right will be reserved unimpaired to the
party giving the mandate to conveniently dispose of the matter, either
by himself or by someone else; or where he who undertook the performance
of the mandate might be taken advantage of. And if the party to whom the
mandate was given to purchase something does not do so, and does not
state that he will not purchase it, he will be responsible for his own
negligence, and not for that of another; and it is settled that he will
be liable to an action on mandate.

He will still further be liable (as Mela also has said) if he should
fraudulently revoke the mandate at a time when he could not properly
make the purchase.

23. *Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.*

If, however, the mandatary alleges as an excuse for not complying with
the mandate the existence of illness, or the deadly enmity of his
adversary.

24. *Paulus, Sentences, Book II.*

Or that the actions brought against the debtor will be of no force or
effect.

25. *Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.* Or any other just cause,
he should be heard.

26. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

The death of the person giving the mandate is included among the causes
for negligence to comply with it, for a mandate terminates with death.
If, however, it is executed by a party ignorant of this fact, it is held
that the action will lie for the sake of convenience. Julianus also
stated that a mandate was terminated by the death of the party who gave
it, but that the obligation arising therefrom sometimes continued to
exist.

(1) Where a party directed his debtor to pay Titius for him, and the
debtor paid the money after the death of Titius; although he was
ignorant of the fact, he must be released.

(2) Money is understood to have been lost by a surety, where a debtor
has been substituted by him for the benefit of the creditor, even though
he was not solvent; because the creditor who accepts a debtor who has
been substituted, makes the security good.

(3) Where a party who wishes to make a present to a surety discharges
his creditor, who is his own debtor, the surety can immediately bring
suit on mandate, as it makes no difference whether he paid the money to
the creditor or released the latter from his obligation.

(4) It should also be borne in mind that a surety cannot recover more
in an action on mandate than he has paid.

(5) I became your surety for the amount of ten *aurei*, by your
direction, and I paid the agent of the creditor. If the latter was the
true agent, I am immediately entitled to an action on mandate, but if he
was not, I can bring an action for recovery against him.

(6) A mandator cannot make a charge of all the expenses which he may
have incurred; as, for instance, where, because he has been robbed by
thieves, or has lost property by a shipwreck, or he, or the members of
his family, have been attacked by disease, he has been compelled to
incur expense; for these things should be rather attributed to accident
than to mandate.

(7) Where, however, a slave steals from you what you had purchased by
my direction, Neratius says that you can bring an action on mandate to
compel the slave to be surrendered to you by way of reparation, if this
happened without your fault; but if I knew that the slave was dishonest,
and did not warn you, so that you could provide against it, I must then
make good to you the amount of your interest.

(8) A workman, by the direction of a friend, bought a slave for ten
*aurei*, and taught him his trade; he then sold him for twenty *aurei,
*which he was compelled to pay by an action on mandate. Afterwards, he
had judgment rendered against him in favor of the purchaser, on

the ground that the slave was not sound. Mela says that the mandator
will not be obliged to make good to him what he paid, unless, after he
made the purchase, the slave became unsound without bad faith on his
part. If, however, he had given him instructions by order of the
mandator, the contrary would be the case, for then he could recover what
he had expended, as well as what had been paid for the maintenance of
the slave, unless he had been asked to instruct him gratuitously.

27. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

If anyone should write to another to release his debtor, and that he
himself will pay him the money which he owes him, he will be liable to
an action on mandate.

(1) If I have delivered to you a slave with the understanding that you
will manumit him after my death, the obligation will be established.
Moreover, I will, myself, be entitled to an action against you, if,
having changed my mind, I should wish to recover the slave.

(2) Where a party has undertaken the performance of a mandate, and can
execute it, he should not fail to do what he has promised, otherwise,
judgment will be rendered against him for the amount of the interest of
the mandator.

If, however, he is aware that he cannot perform the service, he should
notify the mandator of that fact, as soon as he can, that the former may
employ some one else if he should desire to do so. If he failed to
notify him when he could have done so, he will be liable for the amount
of interest of the mandator, but if, for some reason he was unable to
notify him, he will be secure.

(3) A mandate is terminated by the death of the party to whom it was
given, if he died without having, in any way, complied with it; and his
heir, even though he may have executed the mandate, will not be entitled
to an action on mandate on this account.

(4) The expenses incurred through the performance of the mandate, if
they were incurred in good faith, should by all means be paid; and it
makes no difference if he who gave the mandate would have paid less if
he had been transacting the business himself.

(5) If you make a loan to Titius by my direction, and bring an action
of mandate against me, I should not have judgment rendered against me,
unless you assign to me the rights of action which you have against
Titius. But if you should sue Titius, I myself will not be released, but
I shall be liable to you only to the extent that you have not been able
to recover from Titius.

28. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIV.*

Papinianus says, in the Third Book of Questions, that the mandator of a
debtor who pays does not release the principal debtor by operation of
law; for he pays on account of his own mandate in his own behalf, and
therefore he thinks that the rights of action against the principal
debtor should be assigned to the mandator.

29. *The Same, Disputations, Book VII.*

Where suit has been brought against a surety, and he, not being aware
that the money has not been actually delivered to the debtor, makes
payment on account of his suretyship; the question arises whether he can
recover the amount that he has paid in an action on mandate? And if,
indeed, being aware of the facts, he neglects to file an exception on
the ground of fraud, or because the money was not paid, he will be held
to have participated in the fraud, for gross negligence very nearly
resembles fraud. Where, however, he was ignorant of the facts, no
responsibility can attach to him. On the same principle, if a debtor is
entitled to an exception, for instance, on the ground of an agreement,
or for some other reason, and he, not knowing this, does not avail
himself of this exception; it must be said that he will be entitled to
an action on mandate, for the principal debtor could have warned his
surety, and ought to have done so, in order to prevent him from
ignorantly paying what was not due.

(1) It is a point susceptible of discussion, where a surety, not being
aware that he has bound himself illegally, makes payment, whether he
will have an action on mandate? If, indeed, he was ignorant of the
facts, his ignorance will be an excuse, but if he was ignorant of the
law the contrary opinion must be held.

(2) If the surety, not being aware that the debtor has paid, makes
payment himself, I think that he will be entitled to an action of
mandate; for he should be excused if he had not divined that the debtor
has paid, for the latter should notify his surety as soon as he has
paid, to prevent the creditor from overreaching him, and, by taking
advantage of his ignorance, obtain from him the amount for which he

became surety.

(3) This also should be discussed with reference to the surety, namely:
if when he paid he did not notify the principal debtor, and the latter
then satisfied the obligation, which he should not have done. I think
that when he could have notified him, and did not do so, if the surety
brings suit on mandate he should be barred; for if he did not notify the
debtor after he made payment, he is guilty of an act resembling fraud.
Moreover, the principal debtor should assign his right of action to the
surety, to prevent the creditor from receiving double

payment.

(4) Even though the surety should fail to perform certain acts, he is
not guilty of fraud; as, for example, where he neglects to avail himself
of an exception based on agency, whether he knew, or was ignorant of his
right. For, in this instance, good faith is concerned, and it is not
agreeable to it, to quibble concerning nice distinctions of the law, but
only to ascertain whether the party is a debtor or not.

(5) In all the examples above mentioned, where the creditor has
received money which was not actually lent to the debtor, or has been
paid a second time, an action for recovery will lie against him, unless
the money was paid to him on a judgment; for, in this instance, an
action for recovery will not lie on account of the authority of the
judg-

ment, but he himself, because of his duplicity, should be punished for
the crime of swindling.

(6) If a surety who is released by lapse of time, nevertheless, pays
the creditor, he will legally be entitled to an action against the
principal debtor; for, although he has already been released by keeping
faith, he has released the debtor. Therefore, if he is ready to defend
the principal debtor against his creditor, it is perfectly just that he
should recover what he paid by an action on mandate. And this opinion
was also held by Julianus.

30. *Julianus, Digest, Book XIII.*

If I give you a slave with the understanding that you will manumit him,
and afterwards my agent should forbid you to manumit him, can I bring an
action on mandate, if you grant him his freedom?

(1) I answered that, if the agent had good reason for preventing the
manumission of the slave whom I had received for the sole purpose of
manumitting him; for instance, if he should have subsequently
ascertained that he had forged accounts, or that he had plotted against
the life of his former master, I will be liable, if I do not pay
attention to the notice of the agent. But, if the notice was given by
the agent without any good reason, but merely in order to prevent the
manumission of the slave, an action cannot be brought against me, even
though I should give him his freedom.

31. *The Same, Digest, Book XIV.*

If I commit the transaction of my business to a party who is liable to
me in an action for quadruple damages (within a year), and, after the
lapse of the year, for only simple damages; even though I should begin
suit against him on mandate after the year has elapsed, he will be bound
to pay me quadruple damages; because a party who undertakes the
management of another's business is required to pay him what he would
have been compelled to pay others.

32. *The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book III.*

If I should be unwilling to enter upon an estate unless security is
furnished me that I will be indemnified for any loss, and, under such
circumstances, a mandate is given; I think that an action on mandate
will lie. If, however, a party has directed another not to reject a
legacy, the case is very different; for where a legacy is acquired, it
cannot cause any loss to the person receiving it, but the acceptance of
an estate is sometimes injurious. In a word, whenever such contracts are
made, and every time a surety is bound in behalf of the parties, I think
that the obligation of mandate is established; for it does not make much
difference who the individual is, who, after being interrogated, became
surety, or whether one who is absent directs this to be done. Moreover,
it is proper to notice that it is a matter of common occurrence for
estates thought to be insolvent, to be entered upon by the direction of
creditors; and there is no doubt that this creates liability to an
action on mandate.

33. *The Same, On Minicius, Book IV.*

Where a party is asked to become a surety, and obligates himself for a
smaller sum, he is legally liable; but if he becomes bound for a larger
sum, Julianus very properly thinks  and this is also the opinion of
many authorities  that he will not be liable to an action on mandate
for a larger amount than he was asked to become surety for, but only for
the sum contained in the request; because he did what he was directed to
do; since it is held that the party who requested him relied upon his
good faith to the extent to which he was asked to be responsible.

34. *Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.*

A man was in the habit of transacting the business of Lucius Titius, as
his agent, and, after he had collected money from the debtors of the
former, he sent him a letter in which he stated that a certain sum
derived from his management of his business remained in his hands, and
that he himself had borrowed the same, and was indebted for it with
interest at six per cent. The question arose whether an action could be
brought for this money, as lent, under these circumstances, and whether
interest could be collected? The answer was that the money was not lent,
otherwise it could be alleged that money would be considered loaned in
every contract where there was no consideration.

This case is not similar to the one where an agreement is made that you
shall have, as a loan, money which has been deposited with you, and it
is lent, because then the money which was mine becomes yours.

Moreover, if I order you to borrow money from my debtor, it becomes a
loan, for this is the indulgent interpretation; and the proof of this is
that where a party who wishes to loan money to another gives him silver
to be sold, he cannot legally bring an action for money loaned, and
nevertheless, the money obtained for the silver will be at the risk of
the party who received the silver. In the case stated, it must therefore
be held that the agent will be liable to an action on mandate, so that,
although the money was at his risk, he must still pay the interest which
was agreed upon.

(1) I directed you, being heir to a share of an estate, to purchase for
me a tract of land belonging to said estate at a specified price, and
you did so. There is no doubt that an action on mandate will lie between
us with reference to the shares of the other co-heirs. So far as your
share is concerned, however, a doubt may arise whether an action on
purchase or on mandate should be brought, for it is not unreasonable to
believe that the purchase was made conditionally with regard to this
share; because, in fact, the question is very important whether, if I
should die before the bargain was concluded, and you, being aware of my
death, refused to sell to another on account of my mandate, my heir
would be liable to you on this account?

And, on the other hand, if you should sell to another party, would you
be liable to my heir? For if the purchase should be held to have

been made under a condition, proceedings can be instituted in the same
way as where any other condition had been complied with after death. If,
however, proceedings had been begun under mandate, for example, if I had
directed land belonging to someone else to be purchased, and death had
taken place, as you were aware of this fact, and the mandate having been
terminated, no action in your favor could be brought against my heir;
but if action had been taken under the mandate, the course of procedure
would be the same as in a case of purchase.

35. *Neratius, Parchments, Book V.*

If I directed you to purchase for me a tract of land in which you have a
share, it is true that, in compliance with this mandate, you are also
required to deliver me your share, after the remaining shares have been
purchased. If, however, I should direct you to purchase the said shares
at a certain price, and you have bought some of them at any price
whatsoever, your share of the proceeds will be subject to diminution, so
that the total amount will not exceed that for which I directed the
property to be purchased. But if I directed you to make the purchase
without fixing any price, and you buy the shares of the other parties at
different prices, you should also sell your shares for a sum which would
be approved by the judgment of a good citizen.

36. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book VII.*

*A* person of this kind should bring all the amounts, large and small,
together, and in that way ascertain the share to be paid by the party
who received the mandate. Many authorities adopt this rule.

(1) In like manner, in the following instance, where I directed you to
purchase something for me at a certain price, and you transacted the
business profitably with reference to the other joint-owners, and made
the purchase at a low figure, you will have for your share the amount of
your interest, provided it is within the sum contained in the mandate;
but what if the parties who held the land in common with you were
compelled to dispose of it at a low price, either on account of the bad
condition of their affairs, or for some other reason? You should not
make the same sacrifice, nor should you profit by this circumstance, as
a mandate ought to be gratuitous, nor should you be permitted, on this
account, to prevent the sale, because you knew that the purchaser was
more anxious to obtain the property than he was at the time he directed
you to purchase it.

(2) If I should direct you to purchase for me a tract of land, which is
sold by certain parties, in such a way, however, that I shall not be
bound by the mandate unless you purchase the entire tract, and you are
unable to purchase it all; you will be transacting your own business
with reference to the shares you have bought, whether you have an
interest in the land or not. The result will also be that he to whom a
mandate of this kind has been given, will, in the meantime, purchase the
different shares at his own risk, and, unless he buys them all, they
will remain in his hands, even though he does not want them. It is more
probable that, since a party can undertake the execution of

a mandate attended with such inconveniences, and has done so
voluntarily, he should discharge his duty by purchasing the different
shares, just as he ought to do in purchasing all of them together.

(3) If I direct you to purchase a tract of land for me, and do not add
that I shall not be liable under the mandate unless you buy it all, and
you purchase one, or several portions of the same; we will then
undoubtedly be entitled to actions on mandate against one another
reciprocally, even though you could not purchase the remaining portions
of the land.

37. *Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.*

I became surety for you that a certain slave should be delivered, and I
complied with the agreement. When I bring an action of mandate against
you, reference should be had to the time when I made payment, and not to
that when the action was brought; and therefore, even though the slave
should afterwards die, an equitable action will,

nevertheless, lie.

(1) The rule is different in the case of a stipulation, for then the
time when the action was brought is considered, unless it should happen
that the promisor is responsible for not having made payment at the
proper time, or the creditor neglected to receive it, for the failure of
neither of the parties should benefit him.

38. *Marcellus, Opinions.*

Lucius Titius permitted Publius Mævius, his son, to mortgage a house
held in common to his son's creditor, but not with the intention of
making him a present of the same; and afterwards Mævius, having died
leaving a minor daughter, the guardians of the latter joined issue
against Titius, as Titius did in proceedings instituted to collect a
loan. I ask whether the part of the house which Titius permitted his son
to encumber should be released by a decision of court?

Marcellus was of the opinion that the judge should determine whether it
should be released, by taking into consideration the character of the
debtor and the intention of the contracting parties, as well as the time
when the property in dispute was hypothecated, for, the disposal of a
legal question of this kind depends upon a judicial

decision.

(1) There is a point which is not dissimilar, and which very frequently
arises, that is, whether a surety can institute proceedings to obtain
his release before he has made payment. One should not always wait until
he makes payment, or until judgment is rendered against him after issue
has been joined; as, if the principal debtor has delayed payment for a
long time, or wasted his property, and especially if the surety has not
the money in his hands ready to be paid to the creditor, he may then
proceed against the debtor by an action of mandate.

39. *Neratius, Parchments, Book VII.*

It was held by both Aristo and Celsus, the father, that property could
be deposited, and the performance of a mandate assumed, under

the following condition, namely: "That the property should be at the
risk of the party who received the deposit, or undertook the performance
of the mandate." This appears to me to be correct.

40. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book IX.*

If I should become surety for you in your presence, and in spite of you,
neither an action on mandate, nor one on the ground of business
transacted will lie. Some authorities hold that an equitable action
should be granted, but I do not agree with them, and think that the
opinion held by Pomponius is correct.

41. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book III.*

An action on mandate can sometimes only be granted on one side; for if
the party who undertook to perform the mandate exceeds its limitations,
he will not be entitled to an action on mandate, and the one who gave
him the mandate will be entitled to an action against him.

42. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL*

If I direct you to investigate the circumstances of an estate, and you
purchase it from me, representing that it is of less value than it
actually is; you will be liable to me in an action on mandate. This will
also be the case if I direct you to ascertain the financial condition of
a party to whom I am about to make a loan, and you falsely represent to
me that he is solvent.

43. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

A person who undertakes the performance of a mandate, "To place money
for a certain time," and does so, can be sued on the mandate, and must
assign any rights of action acquired by delay.

44. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LXII.*

It is a fraudulent act for anyone to refuse to proceed against a debtor
whom he can sue, or where he does not require payment when it can be
exacted.

45. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book V.*

If you have purchased a tract of land by my direction, can you bring an
action on mandate against me, after you have paid the purchase money, or
before you do so, in order to avoid selling your own property?

It is rightly held that an action on mandate will lie, in this instance,
to compel me to assume the obligation by which you are bound to the
vendor; for I myself could bring an action against you to force you to
assign your rights of action against the vendor.

(1) If, by my direction, you have undertaken the defence of a case
which is still in court, you cannot take legal measures to transfer the
defence to me, without good reason, for you have not yet executed the
mandate.

(2) Moreover, if, while you are transacting my business, you bind
yourself to one of my creditors, it must be said that before you make

payment, you will be entitled to an action against me to compel me to
assume the obligation, and if the creditor refuses to change the
obligation, I will be obliged to furnish security to defend you against
him.

(3) If I give an undertaking that you will appear in court, and I do
not produce you, or, if I have assumed your liability, I can bring an
action on mandate to compel you to release me before I make payment.

(4) If I should direct you to pay my creditor, and you should bind
yourself to do so, and, in consequence, have judgment rendered against
you; the more humane opinion is that, in this instance, an action of
mandate will lie in your favor against me.

(5) Wherever we have stated that an action on mandate can be brought
before the money has been paid, the mandatary will not be liable for
non-payment, but only for his act; and as it is just that, where we have
obtained a right of action against a mandatary, we should be compelled
to assign it to the mandator; so, on the same principle, we should be
bound in an action of mandate to release him from liability.

(6) If the surety should, on account of reasonable expenses incurred,
pay a larger sum than that for which he bound himself, he for whom he
became surety must make good the entire amount.

(7) I entered into an agreement with your debtor for the payment of
what you owe me, at your risk. Nerva and Atilicinus say that I can bring
an action on mandate against you with reference to what I have not
previously been able to collect from him, even though the mandate had
reference to your affairs. This is reasonable, for then he who
substituted the debtor is not released if his creditor follows the
claim, and it is not stipulated by him that this is at the risk of the
debtor.

(8) The rule is the same if I should bring an action against the
principal debtor by the direction of the surety, because, through
executing the mandate, the surety would be released from his former
liability.

46. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXIV.*

Where anyone binds himself for a party who promises as follows, namely:
"If I do not deliver Stichus, I will pay a hundred thousand sesterces,"
and he purchases Stichus at a lower price and makes payment, in order
that the stipulation for a hundred thousand sesterces, may not take
effect; it is established that he can bring an action on mandate. It is,
therefore, most convenient that the proper form should be observed in
all cases of mandate, so that whenever the mandate is certain, its terms
should not be violated; but when it is uncertain, or includes several
alternatives, then, although its provisions may have been carried out by
the performance of other acts than those prescribed by the mandate
itself, still, if this was advantageous to the mandator, the action on
mandate will lie.

47. *Pomponius, On Plautius, Book III.*

Julianus says that, if a wife promises her dowry to her surety, because
she is indebted to him on account of his suretyship, after the marriage
has taken place the husband can at once bring an action on mandate
against the debtor; for the reason that he is understood to have lost
money by means of which he could have paid expenses incurred during
marriage.

(1) Where a party has become surety to deliver a slave for you, and he
delivers another slave to the stipulator, he will not himself be
released, nor will he release you; and therefore he will not be entitled
to an action on mandate against you. But if the stipulator has obtained
the said slave by usucaption, Julianus says that it must be held that
there has been a release, and, in consequence of this, an action of
mandate will lie, but only after usucaption has taken place.

48. *Celsus, Digest, Book VII.*

Quintus Mucius Scævola says that if anyone has given security for money
lent at interest, and the principal debtor, having been sued, attempts
to deny that the money was lent at interest, and the surety, by paying
the interest, deprives the principal debtor of the opportunity of
refusing payment, he cannot recover this money from the principal
debtor. If, however, the latter had notified the surety that he would
refuse to pay what is due with interest, and the surety was not willing
to refuse payment on account of his reputation, he can recover from the
principal debtor whatever he paid on this account.

This opinion Sca3vola thought to be well founded; for, in the former
instance, the surety paid but little attention to good faith, when he
appeared to deprive the principal debtor of the power to avail himself
of his right; but, in the latter instance, he should not have been a
source of injury to the surety if he had had any regard for his own
sense of honor.

(1) If I direct you to transact business for me by lending money, with
the understanding that you are to transfer the claim to me at my risk,
and that the profit, if any, will be mine; I think that the mandate will
stand.

(2) But if I direct you to transact the business for yourself, so that
the claim will remain in your possession; that is to say, that you may
lend money to anyone you please, and receive the interest, and that I
alone will assume the risk; this transaction is outside the terms of the
mandate, just as if I should direct you to purchase any kind of a tract
of land for me.

49. *Marcellus, Digest, Book VI.*

I purchase a slave of Titius in good faith, and have possession of him.
Titius sold him by my direction, not being aware that he really belonged
to him; or, on the other hand, I myself sold him at the direction of
Titius, who became the heir of the party who purchased him; the question
arises whether an action on the ground of superior title, and one on
mandate will lie?

I am of the opinion that Titius, although he made the sale as agent, is
liable to the purchaser; and that he would not be entitled to an action
for recovery, even if he had delivered the property, and therefore that
an action on mandate will lie, if he was interested in the slave not
being sold.

On the other hand, the mandator, if he wishes to receive the property
from him, will be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud, and
will be entitled, as heir, to an action based on the purchase of the
testator, who left him the property, against the vendor.

50. *Celsus, Digest, Book XVIII.*

If anyone who is transacting the business of a surety, paid the
stipulator with the understanding that he would release the debtor and
the surety from liability, and he does this in compliance with law, he
can hold the surety liable in an action on the ground of voluntary
agency; nor does it make any difference whether or not the surety has
ratified his act, for he will, nevertheless, be entitled to an action on
mandate, as soon as he does ratify it, and even before he pays the money
to the agent.

(1) Where a certain amount of grain is due, and the surety delivers
African grain, or, impelled by the necessity of payment, he gives
something of greater value than the price of the property to be
delivered, or he transfers Stichus, and the latter dies, or becomes
worthless either through weakness or vice; the amount can be recovered
by an action of mandate.

51. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book IX.*

A surety, although he may have paid the money by mistake before it is
due, can not, nevertheless, bring suit against the creditor; nor can he,
indeed, bring an action on mandate to which he may be entitled against
the principal debtor, before the day of payment arrives.

52. *The Same, Epistles, Book I.*

Where a party has become surety for another for a certain quantity of
wheat, without any reference to its quality; I think that he will
release the principal debtor by furnishing any kind of wheat whatsoever,
but he cannot recover any other kind of wheat from the principal debtor,
except that of the most inferior quality, by the delivery of which he
could have released himself from the claim of the stipulator. Therefore,
if the principal debtor is prepared to give to the surety the same kind
of wheat, by giving which to the creditor, he himself could have been
released, and the surety brings an action for the same kind of wheat
which he furnished, that is to say, grain of superior quality, I think
that he can be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud.

53. *Papinianus, Questions, Book IX.*

Where anyone becomes surety for another, relying on the honor of a third
party who is present and does not object; he can hold both of

them liable to an action on mandate. But if, in compliance with a
mandate of one of the parties, he becomes surety unwillingly or in
ignorance of the facts, he can only sue the one who gave him the
mandate, and not him who incurred the obligation. It does not affect me,
because the principal debtor is released by the money of the surety, for
this happens even if you make payment in behalf of another by my
direction.

54. *The Same, Questions, Book XXVII.*

Where a slave directs someone to purchase him, the mandate is void. But
if the mandate was given for the purpose of manumitting the slave, and
the party in question does not manumit him, the master and vendor can
sue for the recovery of the purchase-money, and an action on the ground
of affection can be brought, for suppose that the slave was a natural
son, or a brother. It was held by persons learned in the law that, in
*bona fide* cases, attention should be paid to the consideration of
affection.

Where the purchaser paid the price out of his own money, (for, otherwise
he could not be released from liability to an action on sale), it is
frequently asked whether he can properly bring an action on the
*peculium?* The more correct and judicious opinion seems to be that the
praetor did not have in mind contracts of this kind made by slaves, by
which they attempted to escape the bad treatment of their masters.

(1) If a freeman serving in good faith as a slave should direct someone
to ransom him, and this is done with the money of the purchaser, it is
established that the contrary action on mandate will lie; provided,
however, that the rights of action which the purchaser has against the
vendor are assigned, supposing that the purchaser did not manumit the
free person aforesaid.

55. *The Same, Opinions, Book I.*

An agent who does not appropriate property which is locked up, but fails
to return after it has been delivered to him, is liable to an action of
mandate, but not to one of theft.

56. *The Same, Opinions, Book III.*

Where anyone has directed money to be loaned, the mandatary can sue the
mandator without having recourse to the principal debtor, and without
selling the pledges, and the creditor can even have recourse to him, if
it is stated in the letter that he has a right to do so, even if the
pledges are sold; for whatever is inserted in a contract for the purpose
of removing all doubt, does not in any way restrict the effect of the
Common Law.

(1) Where a surety has tendered the money in court, and, on account of
the age of the party who is bringing the suit, has sealed it up, and
publicly deposited it, he can immediately proceed by an action on
mandate.

(2) It is none the less necessary to investigate the good faith of the
mandatary during the entire time, where the owner of the prop-

erty returns to the province after five years absence, having been
compelled to leave on business for the State; although he may have
renewed the mandate without having received an accounting. Hence, as it
is the duty of the agent to transfer all that has been done during the
first administration of the business into the account of the second, he
will combine the matters attended to during the first period with those
of the second.

(3) A salary which is dependent upon an uncertain promise cannot
legally be collected by a resorting to extraordinary proceedings, nor
have you the right to have it established by means of an action on
mandate.

(4) It is necessary for an action on mandate to be brought for the
recovery of *bona fide* expenses necessarily incurred; even though the
agent may not have finished the business entrusted to him.

57. *The Same, Opinions, Book X.*

It is settled that a mandate for the sale of slaves is terminated by the
death of the party who undertook the execution of the same; still,
although the heirs, through mistake, and not with the intention of
theft, but of performing a duty which the deceased had imposed upon
himself, should sell the slaves, it is held that they could be acquired
by the purchasers through usucaption, but that after the slave-dealer
had returned from the province, he could not legally avail himself of
the Publician Action, where, on proper cause shown, an exception would
be granted him on the ground of his legal ownership of the slaves; for
it is not proper that he who had relied upon the good faith of a certain
individual, should sustain loss on account of the mistake or
inexperience of the heirs.

58. *Paulus, Questions, Book IV.*

If you defend Titius in accordance with a mandate which has previously
been given you, even if he were dead and you were ignorant of the fact;
I think that you will be entitled to an action on mandate against the
heir of Titius, because a mandate is terminated by the death of the
mandator, but the action on mandate is not. If, however, you undertook
the defence of the case without any mandate, you began, as it were, to
transact the business of the deceased, and you will be entitled to an
action against him on the ground of voluntary agency, just as if you had
released him from liability.

It can also be said that his heir will be liable to the same action.

(1) Lucius Titius gave a mandator to his creditor, the debtor having
afterwards died and the majority of the creditors having consented, it
was decreed by the Prætor that they should receive a portion of their
claims from the heir, the creditor in whose behalf the mandator had been
given, being absent at the time.

I ask if this mandator were sued would he be entitled to the same
exception as the heir of the debtor? I answered that, if he himself had
been present before the Prætor, and had given his consent, the agreement
would be held to have had proper foundation, and that this

exception should be granted to both the surety and the mandator. But, as
in the case stated he was absent, it is unjust to deprive him of his
right of choice, since, if he had been present, he could have demanded
his pledge or privilege, and refused to accept the decree of the Prætor.
For no one can say that, if the creditor were barred, the heir would be
benefited, but the mandator or the surety would be, as he would be
compelled to make good to them the same portion in an action on mandate.
But if the creditor had received his share of the indebtedness from the
heir, would there be any doubt that he would be permitted to bring an
action against the surety for the remainder? By the mere fact of
bringing suit against the heir he would be held to have consented to the
decree.

59. *The Same, Opinions, Book IV.*

If Calpurnius stipulated for the payment of money which had been lent by
the direction of Titius, but had not been given with the intention of
making a present of the same, an action on mandate can be brought
against him by the heir of Titius, to compel him to assign his rights.
The same rule applies where the money was exacted from Calpurnius.

(1) Paulus held that, if the surety purchased from the creditor
property given in pledge by the debtor, an action on mandate could be
brought against him by the heir of the debtor for its recovery, and that
he could be compelled to surrender the profits together with the entire
debt; for he should not be considered as resembling a stranger who had
become the purchaser, since he was required to display good faith in
every contract.

(2) Paulus also gave it as his opinion that, when the day on which
Lucius Titius stated in writing that he would deliver the property is
inserted in the mandate, this offers no obstacle to the bringing of an
action on mandate against him after the time has elapsed.

(3) He also says that one of two mandataries who are bound for the
entire amount can be selected, even if this has not been mentioned in
the mandate; but that, after judgment has been rendered against both,
execution can, and should be issued against each one of them for only
half of the judgment.

(4) A creditor sold a pledge; I ask, if the purchaser was deprived of
possession under a superior title, whether the creditor can have
recourse to the mandator? And does it make any difference whether he
made the sale under his right as creditor, or guaranteed the title in
accordance with the Common Law?

Paulus gave it as his opinion that if the creditor could not realize
enough from the sale of the pledges to discharge the indebtedness, the
surety would not seem to be released.

From this opinion it is apparent that he will not be liable on the
ground of eviction, but that this will contribute to his release.

(5) So-and-So to So-and-So, Greeting: "I direct you to lend eight
*aurei* to Blæsius Severus, my relative, under such-and-such a pledge,
and I will be accountable for the said sum, as well as any addition to
it

by way of interest; and you will be indemnified for the same as long as
Blæsius Severus lives." The mandator having been afterwards frequently
sued, did not answer, and I ask whether he will be released by the death
of the debtor? Paulus replied that the obligation growing out of the
mandate was a perpetual one, although it may have been inserted in the
mandate that, on account of it the mandatary would be indemnified for
the amount as long as Blæsius Severus lived. (6) Paulus also stated that
a person was not held to have complied with the conditions of a mandate,
when it was inserted in the latter that proper security should be
required of the debtor, if neither surety nor pledges had been received.

60. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

A creditor sued a mandator, and judgment having been rendered against
the latter he appealed. The question arises whether the debtor can be
sued by the creditor while the appeal is pending? I answered that he
could be.

(1) Titius wrote to a party who was about to be married, as follows :
"Titius to Seius, Greeting. You know the conditions of my mind toward
Sempronia, and therefore, since you are about to marry her with my
approbation, I wish that you may be satisfied that you are contracting
marriage in accordance with your rank. And although I am aware that
Titia, her mother, will promise the girl a suitable dowry, still, I do
not hesitate to become your surety in order to better secure your
friendship toward my household. Therefore, take notice that I will
indemnify you for whatever you may have stipulated with her on this
account, and that I have ordered this to be done in accordance with my
good faith."

In this manner, Titia, who had not directed Titius to do what he had
promised in writing, nor had afterwards ratified it, promised a dowry to
Seius. I ask whether, if the heir of Titius should make payment, he
would be entitled to an action on mandate against the heir of Titia? I
answered that, according to the facts stated, he would not be entitled
to the action.

The question also arose whether he would have a right of action on the
ground of business transacted? I answered that he could not bring an
action on this ground, for it was evident that Titius had given the
mandate, not so much in behalf of Titia, as because he has consulted his
own inclination. The inquiry was also made whether, if the husband
should bring an action against the mandator, he would be barred by an
exception? I answered that nothing had been stated by which he could be
barred.

(2) The question arose, where anyone has authorized two persons to
transact his business, whether each of them can be sued for the entire
amount in an action on mandate? I answered that each of them could be
sued separately for the entire amount, provided no more was recovered
from both than was due.

(3) Where it was agreed upon, or tacitly understood, between a husband
and his father-in-law, that the burden of the support of the

wife should be borne by the husband, if the father paid interest on the
dowry; the husband will have no action for the recovery of what he had
not consumed, but if the father of the girl proves that he had directed
his son-in-law to support his daughter, an action on mandate will lie.

(4) Lucius Titius committed the management of his business to his
brother's son, in the following words: "Seius to his son, Greeting. I
think that, in accordance with nature, a son should transact business
for his father and his brother, without any express concession. I,
however, give you authority to transact all of my business that you may
wish, where any necessity arises, whether you desire to make sales, or
enter into agreements, or make purchases, or attend to anything else
whatsoever; just as if you were the owner of all my property, and I will
ratify all that you have done, without opposing you in any of your
acts."

The question arose whether, if the party should alienate property or
give a mandate, not with the intention of transacting the business, but
fraudulently; would his act be valid? I answered that he who had given
the mandate in question had certainly allowed great latitude, but that
he had expected that the business would be conducted in good faith.

I also ask whether, when Seius had contracted obligations in performing
the duties of a magistrate, Lucius Titius could be sued on that ground,
or whether his property would be liable on account of the
above-mentioned words of the letter? I answered that he could not be
sued, and that his property would not be liable.

61. *Paulus, On Neratius, Book II.*

If I have directed a son under paternal control to bring an action for a
debt, and, having been emancipated, he collects it; I can properly bring
an action on the *peculium* within a year; but Paulus says the action
must be brought against the son himself.

62. *Scævola, Digest, Book VI.*

Where a controversy has arisen with reference to the estate of a
deceased person between the appointed heir on the one hand, and Mævius,
the paternal uncle, and the paternal aunts of the testator on the other;
Mævius stated in a letter which he wrote to his sisters that whatever he
obtained in case of a favorable judgment, would belong to all of them in
common; but no stipulation was entered into in accordance with the terms
of the letter.

The question arose whether, if Mævius had made an agreement with the
heir in such a way that certain real estate and other property would
come into his hands as the result of the same, a suit based on his
letter could be brought against him by his sisters? The answer was that
it could.

(1) I gave a mandate in the following words: "Lucius Titius to his
friend Gaius, Greeting. I beg and direct you to offer yourself as surety
to Sempronius in behalf of Publius Mævius, and whatever is

not paid to you by Publius I will make good; and I notify you by this
letter written with my own hand."

I ask whether, if Gaius should not become surety, but should merely
direct the creditor, and act differently from what was set forth in the
mandate, he would be liable in an action on mandate? The answer was that
he would be liable.^1^



TITLE II. CONCERNING THE ACTION ON PARTNERSHIP.

1. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

A partnership can be formed either perpetually, that is, to say during
the life of the parties, or for a certain time, or to begin at a certain
time, or under some condition.

^1^ The general rules governing bailments were established at a very
early date. The Code of Hammurabi pronounced a bailee who appropriated
property deposited with him a thief, and punished him accordingly.

"If a man purchases silver or gold, manservant or maid servant, ox,
sheep, or ass, or anything else from a man's son, or from a man's
servant without witnesses or contracts, or if he receive the same in
trust, that man shall be put to death as a thief." (The Code of
Hammurabi, Sec. 7.)

Hindu laws of great antiquity prescribe the duties of the bailee and the
penalty for their violation. "A man ought not to take upon himself the
Trust of another's Property; if he accepts such Trust, he must preserve
it with Care, and return it upon the First Demand.

"If a Trustee does not return to the Owner, upon Demand, the Property
deposited in his Hands, the Magistrate shall fine him." (Gentoo Code,
Chap. V.)

"In the case of a deposit sealed up, the bailee shall incur no censure
on the redelivery, unless he has altered the seal or taken out
something.

"If a deposit be seized by thieves, or destroyed by vermine, or washed
away by water, or consumed by fire, the bailee shall not be obliged to
make it good, unless he took part of it for himself." (Sir Wm. Jones,
Laws of Menu, Page 302.)

Hebrew jurisprudence permitted a bailee, who had undertaken the charge
gratuitously, in case the object committed to his care was lost or
stolen, to release himself from liability by swearing that this did not
occur through any fraud or negligence on his part. The qualified
possession of the property by the bailee entitled him to any damages
paid by a thief, as he was subrogated to the rights of the bailor. If
the bailee transferred the article entrusted to him to the keeping of
another, he was responsible under all circumstances.

The greatest diligence was required where money was deposited for
safekeeping, on account of the facility with which it could be lost or
misappropriated. When left with a money-changer, if tied up or sealed,
he could not make use of it, and no responsibility whatever attached to
him for its loss; otherwise, the presumption arose that he was
authorized to employ it in his business, and he was held liable even for
ordinary negligence. The fraudulent conversion of a bailment to the use
of a bailee involved the payment of its value at the time which was
done. The bailee, in the above-mentioned instance, while, in reality,
guilty of theft, was, in accordance with the practice of all ancient
communities, not considered to have perpetrated an offence against the
State, but an injury against the individual, which, in case the property
was stolen while in his possession, was expiated by the payment of
fourfold damages to him, by the thief, (Mishnah, Chap. III, Bailments.)

The Mosaic law definitely established the liability of the bailee in
case of theft, or negligence. If the property was stolen, he was
compelled to make resti-

(1) In the formation of a general partnership, the entire property of
the partners immediately belongs to them all in common.

2. Gams, *On the Provincial Edict, Book X.*

Because, although delivery does not actually take place, still, it is
tacitly presumed to do so.

3. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

The existing debts remain in the same condition, but the rights of
action should be reciprocally assigned.

(1) When a general partnership has been expressly entered into,
estates, legacies, donations, and property acquired in any way
whatsoever, are acquired in common.

(2) The question arises, when a lawful estate falls to any of the
partners to be held in common, what is meant by the term "lawful

tution, but if it was torn to pieces or badly injured, he could not be
compelled to replace, or pay for it, if he produced it by way of
evidence. He was also allowed to purge himself from suspicion by oath. A
borrowed animal, if injured or killed while under his control, and in
the absence of the owner, must be made good.

"If a man shall deliver unto his neighbor money or stuff to keep, and it
be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let him pay
double.

"If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be
brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his
neighbor's goods.

"Then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both, that he hath not
put his hand unto his neighbor's goods; and the owner of it shall accept
thereof, and he shall not make it good.

"And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner
thereof." (Exodus XXII, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.)

Absolute want of consideration is an essential factor of bailment under
Mohammedan law, where an agreement to the contrary is not entered into.
If gratuitous, only ordinary diligence is demanded. Bailment is divided
into four classes, loan for use, hire, deposit, and pledge.

In a loan for use, the consent of the owner is necessary, but that of
the bailee is not required. He is not liable, if not guilty of
negligence. Authorities differ as to whether he can legally bind himself
to be responsible, even if he expressly assumes the obligation to do so.
A boy who has been entrusted with the transaction of ordinary business
can make a loan of this kind.

Where property is hired, and the amount of compensation is not
mentioned, what is customary must be paid, unless the bailment is
gratuitous. No deviation from the terms of the contract is permitted,
and if this should take place, the bailee will be responsible in case of
loss or injury, unless it was caused by irresistible force or
unavoidable accident.

It was said by Mohammed, "An honest trustee is not responsible," hence,
where a deposit is made, the bailee will not be liable for its loss,
under ordinary circumstances; he will, however, be responsible if he
fails to deliver it on demand, or if he does not take the same care of
it that he does of his own property; and, for this reason, he can leave
it in charge of the members of his family. The bailee of a deposit will
also be liable for its loss or injury, if he should deny having received
it.

In a contract of pledge, the possession of the property given as
security is necessary to establish the obligation, after the agreement
has been made. If a pledge, whose value is equal to the amount of the
debt, is destroyed while in the hands of the pawnee, his claim is
considered to be cancelled. When he attempts to collect payment, he must
produce the pledge in court; and this rule applies to partial payments,
as well. He has a right to make use of the article pawned, if

estate"? Must this be understood to be one that descends to a party by
law, or one which is bequeathed by will? It is more probable that it
only refers to an estate which descends by law.

(3) Where a partnership is contracted fraudulently, or for the purpose
of committing fraud, it is void by operation of law, because good faith
is opposed to fraud and deceit.

4. *Modestinus, Rules, Book III.*

There is no doubt that a partnership can be formed by delivery of the
property, verbally, and by means of a messenger.

(1) Partnerships are dissolved by renunciation, by death, by the
forfeiture of civil rights, and by poverty.

he does so in the same way as the debtor was accustomed to do, provided
this can be done without injury or depreciation of value. (Seyd Ameer
Ali, Mohammedan Law, Vol. I, XXVI, I, II, III. The Hedaya, Vol. I, III,
XXVIII, 1, XLVIII, 1.)

The Roman classification of bailments was adopted by the early English
jurists, and, while still theoretically existent, is little used in
modern practice, although most legal writers in both England and America
refer to it. The rules by which bailments were distinguished from one
another by the Civil Law, as well as their application to English
jurisprudence, have undergone many alterations. Bracton says that anyone
who borrows property merely to be used, is required to restore it, or
pay its value, even in case of its loss by superior force or inevitable
misfortune, a rule utterly at variance with that of the Civil Law. "*Is
qui rem comodatam accepit, ad ipsam restituendã tenetur, vel eius
preciu, si forte incendio, ruina, naufragio, aut latronum, vel hostium
incursu, consumpta fuerit vel deperdita, subtracta vel ablata*."
(Bracton, *De Leg. et Consuet. Anglise*, III, I, 99.)

The law as laid down by Coke is diametrically opposite to that stated by
Bracton, and coincides with the Roman doctrine.

"If the goods be delivered to him to be kept as he would keepe his owne,
then if they be stollen from him without his default or negligence, he
shall be discharged.

"And that which hath beene said before of stealing, is to be understood
also of other like accidents, as shipwracke by sea, fire by lightning,
and other like inevitable accidents." (Coke, Institutes, I, 89a.) This,
of course, is upon the presumption that the bailee exercised due
diligence.

The English rule with reference to deposits and pledges is set forth as
follows: "If a Man pawns Goods to me for Money, and I put them among my
other Goods, and all are stole before any tender of the Money, I shall
not answer to him for the Goods, for I had a Property in the Goods at
the time.

"A general Bailee of Goods shall answer for them, if they are stole with
his own Goods, for when he accepts them generally, it is with a Warranty
in Law.' (D'Anvers, A General Abridgment of the Common Law, I, 684,
Bailment.)

The responsibility of the bailee depends largely upon the circumstances
of each individual case. Where the contract is for the benefit of both
parties, he will be liable for ordinary want of care, but where no
advantage accrues to him, he can only be held for gross negligence. This
rule, however, has not been universally accepted by the English courts.
(Stephen, Commentaries on the Law of England, II, II, V, 4.)

In the United States, as in England, the degree of diligence to be
employed is regulated by the nature of the property, the character of
the surroundings, and the conditions of the trust imposed and accepted.
It is always tacitly understood that the bailee shall use such diligence
as he is capable of, and is in the habit of employing with reference to
his own property under similar circumstances; for if the bailor was
aware of this, the bailee will be released from liability in case of a
loss of, or injury to the articles entrusted to him for safe-keeping,
pro-

5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

Partnerships are formed either generally, where all the property is held
in common, or specially, for some particular kind of business, for the
collection of taxes, or even for a single transaction.

(1) Moreover, a valid partnership can be formed by parties who have not
the same means; since frequently one who is less wealthy, makes up by
his labor what he lacks in property.

(2) A partnership cannot legally be contracted for the purpose of
making a donation.

vided he discharges his duty to the best of his ability. (Parsons, The
Law of Contracts, III, XI.)

Under the general provisions of the Austrian Code having reference to
bailments, the bailee, by his acceptance of the trust, acquires neither
property in, possession of, nor right to use the article entrusted to
his care, but is merely the holder of the same charged with the duty of
preserving it from injury. This differs from the English rule by which
qualified ownership, as well as possession, is transferred with the
property, enabling the bailee to sue for its recovery, or to collect
damages in case he is deprived of it, or it is injured while in his
custody. The Austrian law prescribes responsibility for want of ordinary
diligence, but not for accident, except when the article has, without
necessity or permission, been committed to the care of a third party, or
default in delivery to the bailor has occurred with resultant loss or
deterioration.

"*Durch den Verwahrungsvertrag erwirbt der Übernehmer weder Eigenthum,
noch Besitz, noch Gebrauchsrecht; er ist blosser Inhaber mit der
Pflicht, die ihm anvertraute Sache vor Schaden zu sichern.*

"*Der Verwahrer haftet dem Hinterleger für den aus der Unterlassung der
pflichtmassigen Obsorge verursachten Schaden, aber nicht, fur den
Zufall;*

"*Hat aber der Verwahrer von der hinterlegten Sache Gebrauch gemacht;
hat er sie ohne Noth und ohne Erlaubniss des Hinterlegers einem Dritten
in Verwahrung gegeben; oder die Zurückstellung verzögert, und die Sache
leidet einen Schaden, welchem sie bey dem Hinterleger nicht ausgesetzt
gewesen ware*." (*Allgemeines Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch*, Arts. 958, 964,
965.)

In Sweden, the depositary must keep the property confided to him with
the same care that he does his own. If he makes use of it without
permission of the depositor, he will be liable to a fine, in addition to
a suit for damages. Where an article is loaned for use, and the bailee
disposes of it without authority, he will be liable for double damages,
and the owner can recover it. If a pledge is injured while in possession
of the creditor, he will be responsible, if it happened through his
fault. Generally speaking, all contracts or bailment must be made in the
presence of witnesses, or committed to writing.

"*Sätter man i pant guld, silver, eller vad det heist är i lösören; göre
det med tyenne vittnen, eller tage därå handskrift av honom, som panten
i händer får.*

"*Säljer, pantsätter, eller bortgiver någon, utan ägarens ja och
samtycke, det han lånt haver; betale han det fullt till den, som lånet
gay, och (böte half ten av dess värde). Äge ock långivaren makt, att
lösa det åter.*

"*Lägger man in hos annan i förvar guld, silver, penningar, eller, annat
löst gods; lägge in med vittnen, eller tage brev därå.*

"*Inlagsfä, och förtrott gods, bör man vårda som sitt eget.*

"*Nöter man förtrott gods, eller sig till nytta det brukar, utan ägarens
samtycke; (böte tic daler), och skadan åter." (Sveriges Kikes Lag, Kap.*
X, 1; XI, 4; XII, 1, 4.)

The rules of the Civil Law are, for the most part, directly applicable
to bailments under the French Code. In a loan for use, the borrower is
not entitled to a lien on the article for a debt due to him from the
lender. The latter is liable for any necessary expense incurred for the
preservation of the property during the time of the loan. Documentary
evidence is requisite to prove the fact of a deposit,

6. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book IX.*

If you form a partnership with me with the understanding that you are to
have control of the shares of the partnership, this control should be
such as would be exercised by a good citizen, and should be according to
the judgment of one, as we may not be equal partners; for instance,
where one of us has placed more labor, industry, or capital in the
partnership.

7. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

It is lawful to contract a simple partnership, and then, if no other
provision is made, it is held to be one including everything acquired by
gain, that is to say, where any profit is obtained from purchase, sale,
leasing, and hiring.

8. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

Profit is understood to be whatever is derived from the industry of each
of the partners.

9. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

Sabinus does not add that such a partnership should include an
inheritance, a legacy, a donation *mortis causa*, or *non mortis causa,
*and this is perhaps for the reason that these things do not come
without a cause, but are granted on account of merit.

10. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

And for the reason that very often an inheritance passes to us as a debt
from a parent or from a freedman.

11. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

Quintus Mucius renders the same opinion with reference to inheritances,
legacies, and donations.

when the value of the article is more than one hundred and fifty francs;
and, where it is worth that amount, if the contract has not been reduced
to writing, the mere statement of the bailee is sufficient to release
him from liability.

"*L'emprunteur ne peut pas retenir la chose par compensation de ce que
le préteur lui doit.*

"*Si, pendant la durée du prêt, l'emprunteur a été obligé, pour la
conservation de la chose, à quelque depense extraordinaire, nécessaire,
et tellement urgente qu'il n'ait pas pu en prévenir le prêteur, celui-ci
sera tenu de la lui rembourser.*

"*Le dépôt volontaire doit etre prouvé par écrit. La preuve testimoniale
n'en est point reçue pour valeur excédant cent cinquante francs.*" (Code
Civil, Sec. 1885, 1890, 1923.)

The provisions of the Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese laws on this
subject are almost identical with those of France. (*Código Civil de
España*, IV, X, XI *Codice Civile del Regno d'ltalia*, III, XVI, 1, 2,
3; XVII, 1, 2, 3, 4. *Codigo Civil Portuguêz*, II, II, IV, 8, V, 3.)

By the law of Japan, the depositary is entitled to reparation for any
damage sustained arising out of the nature of, or defect in the thing
left in his care. The depositor may, at any time, demand its return,
where no provision was made to the contrary. In a loan for use, the mode
of its employment is established by the terms of the agreement under
which its possession was transferred. A third party cannot make use of
it, or in any way derive profit therefrom. (Civil Code of Japan, Sec.
VI, XI.)  ED.

12. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

*A* debt due to a partner is not included in the capital of the
partnership, unless it is derived from the profit obtained by one of the
partners.

13. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

If it is stated in the articles of partnership that the gains and
profits shall be in common, it is clear that this is to be understood
only to apply to such profits as come from the efforts of the partners.

14. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

If it is agreed by the partners that the property in common shall not be
divided until a certain period has elapsed, they are not held to have
agreed not to withdraw from the partnership before that time has passed.
What would be the effect, however, if an agreement was made not to
withdraw? Would it be valid?

Pomponius very properly states that such an agreement would be void, for
if it were not made, and one of the partners should withdraw at an
inopportune time, an action on partnership will lie against him; and
even if an agreement is made not to withdraw from the partnership within
a certain period, and a partner should withdraw before it had elapsed,
his withdrawal would be valid; nor would he be liable in an action on
partnership who withdrew on the ground that the condition was not
fulfilled under which the partnership was formed, or that his partner
had caused him so much injury and loss that it was not advantageous for
him to endure it;

15. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

Or because it was not possible for him to enjoy the property on account
of which the business of the partnership was undertaken.

16. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

The same rule applies where a partner withdraws from the partnership
because he, even against his will, is obliged to be absent for a
considerable time in the public service; although sometimes he can be
opposed, since he may be able to conduct the transactions of the
partnership through another person, or charge his partner with it;
still, this cannot be done unless his partner is especially qualified
for the business, or another can be easily obtained for the management
of the partnership, by the partner who is obliged to be absent.

(1) Therefore, where it is agreed that the partnership property is not
to be divided, unless some good reason arises, it cannot be sold, or
disposed of in any other way so that a division may be made. And, in
fact, it may be said that a sale is not absolutely forbidden, but an
exception can be filed against the purchaser if he divides the property
before the vendor had a right to do so.

17. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

A partner who alienates property under such circumstances violates the
agreement relative thereto, and is liable to an action on partnership,
or for the division of property held in common.

(1) If a partnership is dissolved in the absence of a partner, the
ownership remains in common until the latter ascertains what he who
withdrew from the partnership has acquired, for any loss should be borne
by him alone who withdrew; but what the absent partner may have acquired
belongs exclusively to him, and any loss resulting therefrom must be
apportioned in common.

(2) In the formation of a partnership, nothing is gained by the partner
giving security not to withdraw; because an inopportune withdrawal
causes liability for damages by operation of law, in an action on
partnership.

18. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

Where a slave forms a partnership, it will not be sufficient for him to
be ordered by his master to withdraw from it, but his partner must be
notified of his renunciation of the same.

19. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

Where anyone is admitted into a partnership he alone is his partner who
admitted him. This is perfectly proper, for, since a partnership is
formed by consent, he cannot be my partner whom I am unwilling should be
such. What would be the case, however, if my partner should admit him?
He would be his partner alone;

20. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXI.* For the partner of my partner
is not mine.

21. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XX.*

And whatever such a partner may obtain from our partnership he will
share with the one who admitted him; for we will not hold our share in
common with him, and he who admitted him will be responsible for him to
the partnership; that is to say, the said partner will have a right of
action against him, and will pay to the partnership whatever he
recovers.

22. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.*

On the other hand, he who has admitted him will be responsible to him
for the acts of the other partners as well as for his own, because he
himself has a right of action against them.

It is also certain that there is nothing to prevent proceedings in an
action on partnership from being instituted between the partner who
admitted him and him who was admitted, before this is done between the
other partners and the one who admitted him.

23. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

Pomponius is in doubt as to whether it will be sufficient for the said
partner to assign to his associates the right of action which he has
against the newcomer, in case of loss, if the latter should not prove to
be solvent, or whether he should fully indemnify them. I

think that he who admitted the new partner will be liable to indemnify
them entirely, because it would be difficult to deny that he was to
blame for doing so.

(1) He also asks whether any profits which may have accrued on account
of the admission of the said partner can be set off against a loss which
was caused by his negligence?

He answered that they should be set off, which is not correct; for
Marcellus states, in the Sixth Book of the Digest, that, if the slave of
one of several partners having been placed in charge of the affairs of
the partnership by his master, conducts them in a negligent manner, he
who placed him in charge must make good the loss to the partnership; nor
can any profits which may have accrued to the partnership through the
slave be set off against the loss.

He also says that the Divine Marcus decided that one partner could not
say to another: "Relinquish the profits which have accrued through your
slave, if you desire to be indemnified for the loss."

24. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

It is evident that if two partners place the slave of one of them in
charge of the business of the partnership, the master of said slave will
not be responsible except to the extent of the *peculium;* for both of
them should be liable to the same risk, as they both appointed him.

25. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

A partner is none the less liable for any loss suffered by his
fellow-partners on account of his negligence; even though the value of
the partnership property may have been increased in many other ways by
his industry. The Emperor Antoninus rendered this decision in a case
brought before him on appeal.

26. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

And, therefore, if a partner transacts business relating to the
partnership in a negligent manner, but in many respects benefits the
partnership pecuniarily, the profit will not be set off against the
negligence; as Marcellus stated in the Sixth Book of the Digest.

27. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

All debts contracted during the existence of the partnership must be
paid out of the common fund, even though payment was not made until
after the partnership has been dissolved. Therefore, if a partner
entered into a contract under a condition, and the condition took place
after the partnership had been dissolved, the indebtedness must be
discharged out of the common property. Hence, if the partnership is
dissolved in the meantime, security should be furnished to one another
by the partners.

28. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LX.*

If we are partners, and one of us owes a sum of money payable within a
certain time, and the partnership is dissolved; the partner

cannot deduct this sum as if it was due at that time, but it must be
divided among all the partners, who should give security to defend their
other partner when the day of payment arrives.

29. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where the apportionment of shares is not mentioned in the formation of
the partnership, it is held that they are equal. If, however, it should
be agreed upon that one should have two shares, or three, and another,
one, will this be valid?

It is established that it will be, provided that the parties have
furnished more money or labor to the partnership, or where any other
good reason whatsoever exists.

(1) Cassius holds that a partnership can be formed in such a way that,
while one of the partners will not be liable for any loss, the profit
will be common to all. This, however, will only be valid (as Sabinus
says) where the value of the services of the partner will be equal to
the loss; for it frequently happens that the industry of one partner is
of greater advantage to the partnership than the capital invested.

The same rule applies if one partner alone makes a voyage by sea or
land, as only he is exposed to danger.

(2) Aristo states that Cassius was of the opinion that a partnership
could not be formed in such a way that one partner would take the profit
and the other assume the loss, and a partnership of this description is
usually called a "leonine" one. We, also, think that a partnership of
this kind is void, where one of the partners takes the profit, and the
other does not receive any gain at all, but sustains the loss; a
partnership is extremely unjust where one partner suffers the loss, and
receives no benefit whatever from it.

30. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

Mucius states in the Fourteenth Book, that a partnership cannot be
formed in such a way that one partner will suffer a certain part of the
loss, and another receive a different share of the profit. Servius says
in his Notes on Mucius, that such a partnership cannot legally be
formed, for that only is understood to be profit which remains after all
loss has been deducted, nor does loss exist unless all the profit has
been previously deducted.

A partnership can, however, be formed in such a way that different
amounts of the profits remaining in the funds of the partnership, after
all loss has been deducted, can be paid to the partners; and, in like
manner, where loss has been sustained, different shares of it may be
apportioned among the several partners.

31. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

In order for an action on partnership to be brought, the partnership
must intervene in the proceedings, for it is not sufficient for the
property to be in common, unless the partnership appears as a party to
the suit, for an action can be brought in common even outside the
partnership; as, for instance, where we happen to own property to-

gether without the intention of forming a partnership, which occurs
where property is bequeathed to two parties, and also where an article
is bought by two persons at the same time; or where an estate or
donation passes, or is given to us in common, or where we purchase
separately the shares of two joint-owners, without the intention of
becoming partners:

32. *The Same, On the Edict, Book II.*

For when a partnership is formed by express agreement, an action on
partnership will lie; but where there is no agreement, an action can be
brought with reference to the property itself, and the business is held
to have been transacted in common.

33. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

As in the case of farmers of the revenue, as well as where there are
several purchasers; for where they are unwilling to contend with one
another, they are accustomed to purchase the property in common by means
of messengers, and this is very different from a partnership. Therefore,
where a ward enters into a partnership without the authority of the
guardian, he will still be liable to an action on the ground of business
transacted in common.

34. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XX.*

In those instances where one party happens to have expended money on the
common property, or collected the crops or profits of the same, or has
diminished its value, there is no ground for an action on partnership;
but among co-heirs an action for partnership of the estate will lie, and
among others an action for the division of property owned in common. An
action for the division of property held in common can also be brought
between those to whom it belongs by hereditary right.

35. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

No one can enter into a partnership in such a way that his heir may
become a partner therein. An action, however, can be brought against the
heir of a partner to compel him to fulfill the obligation of the
deceased;

36. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

And he must also make good the effects of any negligence of the party of
whom he is the lawful successor, even though he himself may not be a
partner.

37. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

It is clear that, if the heirs of partners have the intention of forming
a partnership in the estate by new consent, whatever they afterwards do
will furnish ground for an action on partnership.

38. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

The arbiter in an action on partnership should see that security is
given for future loss or gain during the existence of the partnership.

Sabinus thinks that this should be done in all *bona fide* cases,
whether they are in general terms, for example, such as arise from
partnership, or from voluntary agency, or from guardianship; or whether
they are of a special character, as, for instance, where they are based
on mandate, on loan for use, or on deposit.

(1) If you and I have formed a partnership, and the property derived
from it is held in common, Proculus says that I can recover any expense
I may have incurred on account of said property, and any profit you may
have obtained from the same, by an action on partnership, or by one for
the division of common property; and that one of these actions puts an
end to the other.

39. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

Where you and I own a field in common, and you bury a dead body therein,
I can bring an action on partnership against you.

40. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XVII.*

The heir of a partner, although he is not a partner, should nevertheless
finish what has been left incomplete by the deceased; and, in this
instance, any bad faith of which he may be guilty can be taken into
consideration.

41. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XX.*

Where one partner has entered into a stipulation with another with
reference to a penalty, he cannot bring an action on partnership if the
amount of the penalty was only equal to that of his interest.

42. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLV.*

If, however, he has obtained the penalty of the stipulation after the
action on partnership has been brought, he will be entitled to that much
less, as the penalty will be charged against him to the principal.

43. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

Where suit has been brought for the division of property held in common,
the right of action on partnership is not extinguished, for the latter
has reference to the partnership and the obligations thereby contracted,
and does not admit of adjudication; but if, an action on partnership is
afterwards brought, less will be recovered by it than by the former one.

44. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

If I should give you pearls to be sold, with the understanding that if
you dispose of them for ten *aurei* you must pay me ten, but if you sell
them for more, you can have the surplus; it seems to me that if this was
done with the intention of forming a partnership, an action on
partnership will lie, otherwise, one on a verbal contract can be
brought.

45. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

An action for theft on account of common property can be brought against
a partner where, either through fraud or malicious intent, he

has removed said property or disposed of it for the purpose of
concealment, but he will also be liable to the action on partnership,
for one action does not destroy the other.

The same rule is applicable to all *bona fide* actions.

46. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

The same rule also applies to a tenant, and to a party who is
transacting the business of another, as well as to one who is executing
a mandate of ours, and to a guardian.

47. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

If I bring suit for the recovery of stolen property, the right of action
on partnership is extinguished, unless I have still further interest in
the matter.

(1) Where a partner has caused damage to property held in common,
Celsus, Julianus, and Pomponius say that he will be liable under the
*Lex Aquilia;*

48. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

But he will, nevertheless, also be liable to an action on partnership,

49. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

If he has injured the partnership by his act; as, for example, if he has
wounded or killed a slave belonging to it and who transacted its
business.

50. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

The result of bringing the action on partnership is that the partner
must be satisfied with one or the other of the two proceedings; because
both have in view the recovery of the property, and not, as in an action
for theft, merely the collection of the penalty.

51. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book III.*

It is also very properly added: "That an action for theft will only lie
if the partner removed the property fraudulently, and with malicious
intent," because if he did so without malicious intent he would not be
liable to an action for theft. And, indeed, it is generally held that a
party who owns a share of the property would prefer to lawfully enjoy
the same, rather than to form an intention to steal it.

(1) Therefore, let us see whether he will be liable under the *Lex
Fabia;* and, although reason suggests that he should not be held
responsible, still, if he has kidnapped the slave, or concealed him, he
will be liable under the *Lex Fabia.*

52. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

Where a tract of land adjoining two others is to be sold, and one of the
parties asks another to purchase it so that he can transfer to him that
part which joins his own premises, and soon after he himself purchases
the tract, his said neighbor not being aware of the trans-

action; the question arises whether the neighbor has any right of action
against him.

Julianus stated that this involved a perplexing question of fact, for if
the intention was that the neighbor should buy the land of Lucius
Titius, and convey it to me, the neighbor would have no right of action
against me who made the purchase; but if the intention had really been
that a purchase of common property was to be made, I would be liable to
an action on partnership to compel me to transfer to you the remainder
of the land after having deducted that portion which I directed you to
buy.

(1) Good faith is an important element in this action on partnership.

(2) The question arises whether a partner is only liable for fraud, or
whether he is also liable for negligence? Celsus states in the Seventh
Book of the Digest, that partners are responsible to one another for
negligence as well as fraud. And he says that, if, in forming a
partnership, one of them promised to furnish his skill and labor, as,
for instance, where a flock held in common is to be pastured; or we give
a field to a party to be improved, and from which the crops are to be
gathered in common; in this case he will surely be liable for
negligence, for the consideration is the value of his labor and skill.
Where a partner damages the common property, it is held that he is also
liable for negligence.

(3) Partners are not responsible for unforseen accidents, that is to
say, for those that are unavoidable. Therefore, if a flock, after having
been appraised, is delivered to a partner and it is lost through an
attack by robbers, or by fire, the loss must be borne in common, if no
fraud or negligence attaches to the party who received the said flock
after it had been appraised. Where, however, it was stolen by thieves,
the loss must be sustained by the party to whom it was entrusted,
because he who received the flock after its valuation was obliged to
take care of it.

These opinions are correct, and an action on partnership will lie,
provided that the flock, even though it had been appraised, was
delivered to be pastured with the intention of forming a partnership.

(4) Two parties formed a partnership in the business of manufacturing
soldiers' cloaks. One of them, having undertaken a journey for the
purpose of purchasing materials, fell among thieves, and his money was
taken, his slaves were wounded, and he lost his private property.
Julianus says that the loss must be borne in common, and that,
therefore, the partner will be entitled to an action on partnership for
half of the loss not only of the money, but also of the other property
which the partner did not take with him, unless he made the journey for
the purpose of purchasing merchandise on account of the partnership.
Julianus very properly holds that if any expense was incurred for
physicians the other partner is liable for his share.

Hence, if property is lost by shipwreck, and merchandise was involved
which it is not customary to transport by vessel, both parties

must sustain the loss; for it, as well as the profits must be divided in
common when it does not occur through the negligence of a partner.

(5) Where two bankers are partners, and one of them profits by a
transaction separately, and appropriates the gain therefrom, the
question arises whether the gain should be divided? The Emperor Severus
gave the following reply in a Rescript to Flavius Felix: "Where a
partnership to carry on a banking business has been expressly formed for
that purpose, any profit which a partner obtains in any way not
connected with said banking business, has been determined by law not to
belong to the partnership."

(6) Papinianus also says in the Third Book of Opinions: "Where brothers
retain undivided the estates of their parents, in order to share among
themselves the profits and losses of the same, any acquisitions which
they obtain from any other source do not belong to the common fund."

(7) He likewise states in the Third Book of Opinions that, having been
consulted with reference to certain facts, he gave the following
opinion: "An agreement was made between Flavius Victor and Vellicus
Asianus that land having been purchased with the money of Victor,
certain buildings should be erected by the labor and skill of Asianus,
and, after the said buildings were sold, Victor should receive the money
which he had invested and a certain sum besides, and Asianus, who had
contributed his labor to the partnership, should be entitled to the
remainder." In this instance an action on partnership will lie.

(8) Papinianus also states in the same Book that where a voluntary
partnership was formed between two brothers, the salaries and other
compensations should be brought into the common fund of the partnership;
although a son who is emancipated would not be compelled to give what he
obtained in this way to his brother who remained under the control of
his father, because, he says, even if he should remain under paternal
control, these things would still be his private property.

(9) He also gave it as his opinion that a partnership could not last
beyond the death of the partners; and therefore that anyone could not be
deprived of the power of testamentary disposition, or of transferring
his estate to a more distant cognate than others who were more nearly
related.

(10) Papinianus also gave it as his opinion that, where a partner
repaired certain parts of a building belonging to the partnership which
was falling into ruin, or had become dilapidated, that he could, as a
privileged creditor, either recover the principal expended together with
the interest within four months after the work had been completed, or he
could acquire said building as his own after that time, and that he had
a right, nevertheless, to bring an action on partnership for the
recovery of his interest; for example, if he preferred to obtain what
belonged to him rather than the ownership of the property. An Address of
the Divine Marcus fixed the term of four months for the interest to
cease, because, after that time, the partner would acquire the
ownership.

(11) Where persons form a partnership in order to purchase something,
and afterwards the property is not purchased on account of the fraud or
negligence of one of them, it is established that an action on
partnership will lie. It is clear that if this condition is added,
namely, "If the property is sold within a certain time," and the period
elapses without the partner being guilty of negligence, the action on
partnership can not be brought.

(12) Cassius stated that the action on partnership is also available
for the recovery of expenses incurred by one of the partners in
repairing a water-course owned in common.

(13) Mela also says that where two neighbors each contributed half a
foot of land for the purpose of constructing a party-wall together,
which was intended to support buildings belonging to each of them, and
after said wall was built, one of them would not permit the other to use
its support, an action on partnership would lie.

The same authority held that, where two parties purchased a vacant lot
to avoid their light being shut off, and it was delivered to one of them
who would not allow the other to have what was agreed upon, an action on
partnership can be brought.

(14) Where several partnerships are formed by the same persons, it is
established that one judgment will be sufficient to decide all
controversies which may arise with reference to them.

(15) Where one partner makes a journey connected with the business of
the partnership, as for instance, for the purchase of merchandise, he
will only be reimbursed for the expenses incurred by him on account of
the partnership. He can, therefore, properly charge reasonable
travelling expenses he incurred for hotel accommodations, for beasts of
burden and the hire of vehicles, as well as for the transport of himself
and his bales of goods, including the price of the same.

(16) Neratius says that where anyone is a general partner, he should
place all his property in the partnership fund; and therefore he gives
it as his opinion that the partnership will be responsible, under the
Aquilian law, for any injury inflicted upon himself, or where any
personal wrong has been inflicted upon him or his son.

(17) He also says that a partner, who has entered into a general
partnership, is not required to bring into the common fund anything
which he has acquired by unlawful means.

(18) On the other hand, it is also discussed by the ancient authorities
whether a general partner who had had judgment rendered against him in
an action for injury committed, could, by means of legal proceedings,
compel the partnership to make good the judgment? Atilicinus, Sabinus,
and Cassius answered that if he had been unjustly condemned, he would be
entitled to recourse of this kind; but if the said injury resulted from
some illegal act of his own, he himself alone must sustain the loss;
which agrees with what Aufidius states was the opinion of Servius, that
is, where there were two general partners, and one of them had judgment
rendered against him for not appearing in court, he could not recover
the amount of the judgment out of the

partnership property; but if he, while present, suffered an unjust
decision, he must be reimbursed from the partnership fund.

53. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

It is clear that the proceeds of a theft or of any other breach of the
law should not be placed in the partnership property, because a
partnership in crime is base and dishonorable. Still, it is evident that
if property obtained in this way becomes a part of the common fund, the
gain must be divided:

54. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

For the reason that where a partner places the proceeds of a crime in
the partnership fund, he cannot recover it, except where he is compelled
to surrender it by a judicial decision.

55. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

Therefore, if a party who committed an illegal act is sued, he can
either surrender only what he misappropriated, or he can do this with a
penalty. He can give up the property, which was taken, alone, in case
the other partner was ignorant that he had placed it with that of the
partnership. If, however, he was aware of the fact, he, also, will be
liable to the penalty, for it is but just that he who participated in
the profit should also share the loss.

56. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

Nor does it make any difference whether the partner is compelled to
surrender the property obtained by theft while the partnership is still
in existence, or after it has been dissolved. The same rule applies to
all actions which arise from dishonorable conduct, as, for instance,
those based on injury, robbery with violence, the corruption of slaves,
and others of this kind, as well as to all pecuniary penalties imposed
in prosecutions for crime.

57. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

Pomponius says the fact must not be lost sight of that these rules only
apply where a partnership has been formed for an honorable and lawful
purpose; for if it has been formed in order to break the law, it will be
void, as it is generally held that there can be no partnership in
matters which are dishonorable.

58. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

It should be considered whether an action on partnership can be brought
where the property which one of the partners brought into the common
fund has been lost. This point was discussed by Celsus in the Seventh
Book of the Digest, with reference to a letter of Cornelius Felix as
follows: "You have three horses, and I have one; we form a partnership
with the understanding that you will take my horse, sell the four horse
team and pay me one-fourth of the

proceeds." Therefore, if my horse dies before the sale is concluded,
Celsus says that he does not think that the partnership will continue to
exist, and that no portion of the value of your horses is due, for the
partnership was not entered into to form a team of four horses, but to
sell one. But if the intention of the parties was stated to be the
formation of a four horse team, and the holding of the same in common,
and that you should be entitled to a three fourths interest, and I to a
one fourth interest in the same, there is no doubt that we are partners
to that extent.

(1) Celsus also discusses the point, where we have contributed money
for the purchase of merchandise, and my money has been lost, at whose
risk would this be? He says that if the money was lost after it had been
placed in the partnership fund, which would not have taken place unless
the partnership had been formed, both parties must bear the loss; just
as in the case where money is lost which was being taken to some distant
place for the purchase of goods. If, however, the money was lost before
it had been placed in the common fund, but after you had destined it for
that purpose, he says that you can recover nothing on that ground,
because it did not belong to the partnership when it was lost.

(2) Where a son under paternal control enters into a partnership, and
is afterwards emancipated by his father, the question is asked by
Julianus whether the same partnership continues to exist? Julianus
states in the Fourteenth Book of the Digest, that the partnership does
continue to exist, for the reason that in contracts of this kind the
beginning of the transaction must be considered.

There is ground, however, for two actions, one against the father, and
the other against the son. The one against the father should be brought
for what he ceased to be liable for on the day before the emancipation,
for he is not liable for the time the partnership existed after the
emancipation; the one against the son, however, includes both periods,
that is to say, the entire time embraced by the partnership; for he says
that if the partner of the son was guilty of any fraudulent act after
the emancipation of the latter, an action on that ground should be
granted to the son and not to the father.

(3) If my slave form a partnership with Titius, and it continues after
the alienation of the slave, it can be said that the first partnership
was terminated by the alienation of the slave and that an entirely new
one began, and, therefore, that an action on partnership will lie both
in my favor and in that of the purchaser of the slave.

An action should also be granted against me as well as against the said
purchaser, for any causes which arose before the alienation of said
slave; but with reference to anything which took place afterwards, an
action should be granted against the purchaser alone.

59. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XII.*

To such an extent is a partnership dissolved by death, that we cannot
even admit that an heir may succeed to the partnership. Sabinus states
that this applies to private partnerships, but in such as have for

*their* object the collection of taxes, the partnership, nevertheless,
continues to exist after the death of a partner; but only provided that
the share of the deceased has been transferred to the heir, so that the
other partner also must divide with the heir, and this also depends upon
circumstances; for what if he on account of whose services the
partnership was especially formed, or without whom its affairs could not
be managed, should die?

(1) What a partner loses by gambling, or as the result of adultery,
cannot be charged to the partnership property, but if a partner has lost
anything on account of our fraudulent acts he can recover it from us.

60. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

Labeo says that a partner who fails to report to the partnership the
profit which he has obtained, or one who uses the money for his own
benefit, must pay interest on it, not as ordinary interest, but by way
of indemnity for what his partner has suffered by reason of his default.

If, however, he did not make use of the money, or was not in default,
the contrary rule applies. Moreover, after the death of a partner, no
estimate of damages can be made on account of any act of his heir,
because the partnership was dissolved by the death of the partner.

(1) A partner, while attempting to prevent slaves, who formed part of
the stock of the partnership from escaping, was wounded; Labeo says that
the expense which he incurred for medical services, in consequence,
cannot be recovered by an action on partnership, because it was not
actually caused by the partnership business, although it was done on
account of it; just as if where someone had avoided appointing a party
an heir, or had passed him by in bequeathing a legacy, or had managed
his property more negligently on account of a partnership, for any gain
which he himself had obtained on account of the partnership he would not
be obliged to place in the common fund; as, for example, if he had been
appointed an heir on account of the partnership, or anything had been
given to him for this reason.

61. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

According to Julianus, however, he can recover what he paid out for
himself for medical services in a case of this kind; and this is true.

62. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

If Titius, with whom I have formed a partnership should die, and I am of
the opinion that his estate belongs to Seius, and I sell the common
property and take half of the proceeds of the sale, and Seius takes the
other half; you, who are in reality the heir of Titius, cannot recover
from me, in an action on partnership, the money which I have paid out;
as was held by Neratius and Aristo, because I have only received the
value of my share. Nor does it make any difference whether I dispose of
my share separately, or together with that which the other party alleges
is his.

Otherwise, the result would be that, even if two partners should sell
the property of the partnership, either one of them would be liable to
the other in an action on partnership for half of whatever had come into
his hands. But you would not be obliged to make good to me in a suit for
the estate anything that you might have obtained from Seius, because
what came into his possession was the price of your share, and nothing
could be recovered from him by me, since I have already obtained what
was mine.

63. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

The opinion of Sabinus is correct, namely, that if the parties are not
general partners, but only associated for a particular purpose, or where
they have acted in bad faith to avoid responsibility, they can still
have judgment rendered against them to the extent of their resources.
This is perfectly reasonable, as a partnership in some respects
resembles a fraternity.

(1) It should be considered whether only the surety of a partner should
be indemnified, or is this, indeed, a personal advantage to all? I think
the latter to be the better opinion; if, however, the surety should
undertake to defend the action of the partner, he can profit by it; for
Julianus says, in the Fourteenth Book of the Digest, that the defender
of the partner can only have judgment rendered against him to the extent
of the resources of said partner. And he adds that the same rule applies
to one who acts as a defender of a patron. This rule is also generally
applicable to all those who are sued to the amount of the means which
they possess.

(2) This exception, however, should not be granted to the father or
master of a partner, if the partnership was contracted by the direction
of either; because it will not be granted to the heir and other
successors of the partner, for the reason that we do not accord the same
privilege to heirs or successors not to have judgment rendered against
them beyond the extent of their resources.

(3) But how can an estimate of the financial resources of a partner be
made? It has been established that the indebtedness of the partner
should not be deducted; and this Marcellus stated in the Seventh Book of
the Digest; unless, as he says, the debts had been contracted with
reference to the partnership itself.

(4) It must also be considered whether the partner should, in a case of
this kind, furnish security for what he cannot pay, that is to say, make
a bare promise to do so. I think that this is the better opinion.

(5) If, where there are three partners, one of them should bring an
action against one of the others, and recover his entire share, and then
another should bring an action against the remaining partner, but is
unable to recover his entire share because the said partner is not
solvent; the question arises whether he who failed to obtain all that he
was entitled to, can bring an action against the one who received the
entire amount of his share, for the purpose of making a division, that

is to say, of placing all the shares upon the same footing, since it is
unjust that one should obtain more and the others less from the same
partnership? This opinion is founded upon equity.

(6) In order to determine whether a partner is able to pay the amount
which he owes, we must take into account the time when the judgment was
rendered.

(7) Anyone is held to be able to make payment who has committed a
fraudulent act in order to avoid doing so, for it is not just for anyone
to profit by his own fraud. This should be understood to apply to all
those against whom suit is brought to the extent of their resources. If,
however, a party is unable to make payment, not on account of fraud, but
because of his own negligence, it must be held that judgment should not
be rendered against him.

(8) An action on partnership can also be brought against the heir of
the partner, even though he may not be a partner, for even if he is not
one, he is, nevertheless, the successor to the profits of the
partnership.

We observe the same rule with reference to partnerships for the
collection of taxes and others of the same kind, namely that the heir is
not a partner unless he has been admitted to the partnership; still, all
the profits of the partnership belong to him, to the same extent that he
is responsible for the losses which may occur either during the lifetime
of the partnership in the collection of taxes, or afterwards.

This rule is not applicable in the case of voluntary partnerships.

(9) If one of two masters bequeaths a legacy, without his freedom, to a
slave held in common, this legacy belongs entirely to the surviving
partner. Nevertheless, the question arises whether he can bring an
action on partnership, for the division of the legacy, against the heir
of the deceased partner? Julianus says that Sextus Pomponius states that
the opinion of Sabinus is that the legacy cannot be divided. Julianus
says, that there are good grounds for this opinion, for what has been
acquired has not been done by reason of the partnership, but on account
of the share of the partnership in the slave. It is not necessary for a
division to be made of what a partner does not acquire through the
partnership, but by means of his own property.

(10) A partnership is terminated by the non-existence of those who
compose it; by loss of its property; by the will of the partners; and by
legal proceedings. A partnership, therefore, is held to be dissolved
when either the persons composing it, the property belonging to it, the
agreement of the partners, or judicial proceedings relating to it, come
to an end. The partners cease to exist, through the alteration of civil
rights either in its greatest, intermediate, or least degree, or by
death. The property is held to be lost where none remains, or its
condition is changed; for no one can be a partner in property which is
no longer in existence, nor in such as has been consecrated for
religious purposes, or forfeited to the State. A partnership is
terminated by the will of the parties, by withdrawal.

64. *Callistratus, Questions, Book I.*

Hence, if partners begin to act separately, and each one of them
transacts business on his own account, there is no doubt that the
partnership is dissolved.

65. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

It is terminated by legal proceedings when the purpose for which it was
formed is changed, either by stipulation or judicial decision; for
Proculus says that a partnership is dissolved whether it be general or
special, whenever legal steps are taken for the purpose of putting an
end to it.

(1) Labeo says that a partnership is dissolved where the property of
one of the partners is sold by his creditors.

(2) Labeo also says that if the partnership was formed for the purpose
of purchasing or leasing something, that then, any profits which may
have accrued, or any loss which may have taken place, must be divided in
common after the death of one of the partners.

(3) We have stated that a partnership can be dissolved by the dissent
of the parties, that is, if all of them are of one mind in this respect.
But, what if only one of them should withdraw? Cassius stated that he
who retires from the partnership releases his partners from
responsibility, so far as he himself is concerned, but does not release
himself from liability to them.

This rule, however, should only be observed where the withdrawal is made
from fraudulent motives; as, for instance, if we form a general
partnership, and afterwards an inheritance passes to one of the partners
and he retires on this account; if the inheritance should be productive
of any loss, this must be borne by the partner who withdrew from the
partnership, but he can be compelled by an action on partnership to
share with the others any profits arising from the same. If he should
acquire any property after his withdrawal, it will not be shared with
the other partners, because fraud has not been committed with reference
to it.

(4) Moreover, if we form a partnership for the purchase of certain
property and afterwards you wish to purchase it yourself, and for this
reason you withdraw from the partnership, you will be liable to the
extent of my interest in said property. But if you withdraw because the
purchase was displeasing to you, you will not be liable even if I
purchase it; because in this instance no fraud exists. These opinions
were also held by Julianus.

(5) Labeo also stated in his work on recent cases, that if one partner
should withdraw from the partnership at a time when it was the interest
of the other for it not to be dissolved; he will be liable to the action
on partnership; for if we form a partnership for the purchase of slaves,
and, after doing so, you withdraw from the association at a time which
is not favorable for the sale of the slave, in this case, you will be
liable to an action on partnership, because you have rendered my
position worse.

Proculus holds this opinion to be correct only where it is the interest
of the partnership not to be terminated; for greater consideration is
usually shown to what is beneficial to the partnership, than for the
private advantage of one of the partners.

These rules are only applicable where nothing has been agreed upon with
reference to these matters, when the partnership was formed.

(6) Where a partnership has been formed for a certain time, one of the
partners, by withdrawal from it before the time has elapsed, releases
his partner from liability to himself, but he does not release himself
from liability to his partner. Hence, if any profit is obtained after
his withdrawal, he will not be entitled to any share of it; but if any
expenses have been incurred, he must also pay his share, unless his
withdrawal took place on account of some necessity. When, however, the
time has elapsed, either party is free to withdraw, because this can be
done without fraudulent intent.

(7) We can also withdraw from a partnership by the agency of others,
and therefore it is held that an agent can also withdraw in behalf of
his principal. Let us consider, however, whether what has been stated on
this point applies to him to whom the general management of the
partnership property has been entrusted, or to him to whom special
directions on this subject have been given; or can the withdrawal
legally be made in either instance? The latter is the more correct
opinion, unless the principal expressly forbade the agent to withdraw.

(8) It is also settled that my partner can give notice of his
withdrawal to my agent. Servius says in a note on Alfenus that it is in
the power of the principal, when notice of withdrawal is given to his
agent, to ratify or reject it at his pleasure; therefore, he will be
held to be released from liability to whose agent notice of withdrawal
was given; but he, also, who gave notice to the agent of his withdrawal,
will be released if he so desires; as we have stated with reference to
one partner who personally notifies the other of his withdrawal.

(9) A partnership is dissolved by the death of one of the partners,
even though it was formed with the consent of all, and several survive,
unless some other arrangement was made when the partnership was formed;
nor can the heir of a partner succeed to the partnership, but he can
share in the profits of it afterwards. Moreover, any loss resulting from
fraud or negligence in transacting the business before the death of the
partner, must be made good to the heir, as well as by him.

(10) Moreover, a partnership formed for any special purpose is
terminated when the business for which it was entered into is finished.
If, however, one of the partners should die, while the affairs of the
partnership were still unchanged, and the reason for the formation of
the partnership should only appear after his death, we must then make
the same distinction as in the case of a mandate; namely, that if the
death of one of the partners was unknown to the other, the partnership
will continue to exist; but if it was known, it will be dissolved.

(11) Just as the partnership does not pass to the heirs of a partner,
so also it does not pass to an arrogator; lest, otherwise, a partner
might

become associated with persons against his will. The party who was
arrogated will, however, remain in the partnership, for even if a son
under paternal control should be emancipated, he will still continue to
be a partner.

(12) We have stated that a partnership can also be dissolved by the
confiscation of property, which is held to relate to the forfeiture of
all the property of a partner to the State, for the latter is considered
as dead when another partner succeeds him.

(13) If any expense should be incurred with reference to the
partnership property, after the partnership has been dissolved, a
partner cannot recover said expense in an action on partnership, because
it is not true that this was done in behalf of the other partner, or on
account of the partnership interest; but, in an action for the division
of property held in common, account must be taken of this expense, for
although the partnership may have been dissolved, the division of the
property nevertheless remains.

(14) Where money belonging to a partnership is in the hands of one of
the partners, and the capital of one of the latter is, to a certain
extent, diminished; suit should only be brought against the partner who
has possession of the money; and, after what is due to him has been
deducted, all of them can bring suit for the balance which is due to

each one.

(15) It is sometimes necessary to bring an action on partnership while
the partnership is still in existence; as, for instance, where the
latter was formed for the purpose of collecting taxes; if on account of
various contracts it is to the advantage of neither partner to withdraw
from the partnership, and one of them fails to place what he has
collected in the common fund.

(16) Where one of the partners is married, and the partnership is
dissolved during the marriage, the said married partner can take the
dowry of his wife out of the partnership property, in preference to any
other claim; because it should be in the hands of him who sustains the
burdens of marriage. If, however, the partnership is dissolved after the
marriage has ceased to exist, he should receive the dowry on the very
day when it should be paid.

66. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.*

If at the time when the partnership property is divided, circumstances
exist which make it certain that the dowry, or even a portion of the
same, should not be given up; the judge should order it to be divided
among the partners.

67. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

Where one of the partners sells the property of the partnership with the
consent of the others, the price ought to be divided, and security
furnished to indemnify him for the future; and if the said partner has
already suffered any loss, it must be made good to him. If, however, the
purchase-money is divided without any security being given, and the
partner who made the sale was compelled to pay something on

account of it; can he recover from some of the partners what he has not
been able to collect from the others, where all of them are not solvent?
Proculus thinks that this burden should be sustained by the others, if
it cannot be collected from some of them; and that this can be defended
on the ground that when the partnership was formed, a community of
profit as well as loss was established.

(1) Where one of several partners, who did not belong to a general
partnership, lent money which belonged to all of them, and collected the
interest, he should only divide the interest if he lent the money in the
name of the partnership; for if he did this in his own name, since he
ran the risk of losing the principal, he is entitled to retain the
interest.

(2) Where a partner incurs some necessary expense with reference to the
business of the partnership, he can bring an action on partnership for
the interest, if he should have borrowed the money at interest. But
where he used his own money for this purpose, it is held, and not
without reason, that he has a right to claim the same amount of interest
which he could have collected if he had lent the money to anyone else.

(3) Judgment cannot be rendered against a partner to the extent of his
resources, unless he acknowledged that he is a partner.

68. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.*

No partner, even though the partnership is a general one, can alienate a
larger amount than that which composes his share.

(1) The question arises whether a party is held to have committed an
act to avoid making payment of the amount for which he is responsible,
who disposes of his property fraudulently to avoid a future suit, or who
does not make use of an opportunity for profit on this account? The
better opinion is that, in this instance, the Proconsul had in mind a
party who had disposed of his property, and this we can infer from the
interdicts in which the sentence, "Because you have committed fraud in
order to avoid being in possession," is inserted.

69. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

When a partnership is formed for the purpose of making purchases, and it
is agreed upon that one of the partners shall furnish the others with
provisions, and shall leave the transaction of the business to them, if
he does not provide them with supplies, an action on partnership, as
well as one on sale, can be brought against him.

70. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII. A* perpetual partnership cannot
be formed.

71. *The Same, Epitomes of the Digest of Alfenus, Book III.*

Two persons formed a partnership to teach grammar, and to share among
themselves any profits that might be obtained from this profession.
After having agreed in the articles of partnership on what they

wished to be done, they then stipulated with one another as follows:
"Whatever is written above must be carried out, and cannot be opposed,
and if the said provisions are not complied with, then twenty thousand
sesterces shall be paid."

The inquiry arose whether if any of these provisions was violated, an
action on partnership could be brought? The answer was that if, after
their agreement had been made with reference to the partnership, they
had stipulated as follows: "Do you promise that these provisions shall
be observed as herein set forth?" The result would be that if the
parties had done this for the purpose of changing their contract, an
action on partnership would not lie, but the whole matter would be
considered to have become a stipulation. But if they had not stipulated
in these terms, "Do you promise that these provisions shall be observed
as herein set forth?" but, as follows, "If these provisions are not
observed, then ten *aurei* shall be paid;" it was held by him that the
matter had not become a stipulation, but only what related to the
penalty had been altered, because the party promising had not bound
himself to do both things, that is, he would make payment and also
perform the agreement, and that if he did not do so he would suffer the
penalty; and therefore an action on partnership would be available.

(1) Two fellow freedmen formed a partnership for the purpose of sharing
all "gains, profits, and emoluments," and afterwards one of them, having
been appointed an heir by his patron, a legacy was left to the other.
The answer was that neither of them was obliged to place what he
received in the partnership fund.

72. *Gaius, Diurnal, or Golden Matters, Book II.*

One partner is liable to another on the ground of negligence, that is to
say of failure to act and lack of diligence. Negligence in this
instance, however, is not understood to mean want of the most exact
diligence, for it is sufficient for him to employ the same diligence in
the partnership affairs as he is accustomed to do in his own; because
where anyone takes a partner who displays very little diligence he has
only himself to blame.

73. *Ulpianus, Opinions, in Answer to Maximin, Book I.*

Where persons form a partnership of their entire property, that is to
say of whatever property either one may subsequently acquire, an estate
which falls to either of them must be placed in the common fund.

(1) He also stated to Maximin that, where persons form a partnership of
their entire property in such a way that whatever is expended or gained
shall be to the common profit or expense; any sums which may be expended
for the children of either must be charged to both.

74. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXII.*

Where anyone has formed a partnership, and makes a purchase, it belongs
to him individually, and not to the common fund, but he can be compelled
by an action on partnership to make it common property.

75. *Celsus, Digest, Book XV.*

Where a partnership has been formed with the understanding that Titius
shall have the regulation of the shares, and Titius dies before he
renders a decision, the partnership is void; because the intention was
that no other partnership should exist than that which is subject to the
decision of Titius.

76. *Proculus, Epistles, Book V.*

You formed a partnership with me under the condition that Nerva, our
common friend, should decide with reference to the shares thereof; and
Nerva decided that you should be a partner to the extent of one-third,
and I to the extent of two-thirds of the capital. You ask whether this
should be ratified in accordance with the rights of the partnership, or
whether we are equal partners, nevertheless? I think that it would have
been better for you to have made the inquiry whether we were partners to
the extent of the shares which he had established, or whether to the
extent of those which would have been apportioned by a good citizen; for
there are two kinds of arbiters, one whose award we should obey whether
it be just or unjust, which rule must be observed when recourse is had
to arbitration by common consent of the parties. There is another kind,
whose award must be compared with that which would be rendered by a good
citizen, although the party who is to give it has been expressly
selected;

77. *Paulus, Questions, Book IV.*

For instance, when the intention of a lease is involved, and the
decision of the lessor is required.

78. *Proculus, Epistles, Book V.*

I think that, in the case stated, the judgment of a good citizen should
be followed, and all the more so, because a decision in an action on
partnership is one where good faith is concerned.

79. *Paulus, Questions, Book IV.*

Wherefore, if the award of Nerva is so improper that its manifest
injustice is apparent, it can be corrected by a judgment on the ground
of good faith.

80. *Proculus, Epistles, Book V.*

What would be the result if Nerva decided that one party should be a
partner to the extent of one thousand shares, and the other to the
extent of two thousand shares? The decision of a good citizen could not
fail to be that we are not partners to the same extent; for example,
just as if one of us should bring into the partnership more labor,
skill, credit, and money than the other.

81. *Papinianus, Questions, Book IX.*

Where a partner promised a dowry in behalf of his daughter, and, before
he paid it, died, having left her his heir, and she afterwards brought
an action against her husband for her dowry; she was released by a
receipt from her husband.

The question arose whether, if she brought an action on partnership, she
ought to receive the amount of the dowry as a preferred claim, if it had
been agreed between the partners that the dowry should be taken out of
the common fund? I say that the contract was not an unjust one, provided
that the girl had not made it merely with reference to one of the
partners; for, if the agreement was reciprocal, it did not make any
difference if only one of the partners had a daughter.

Moreover, if the father should recover the dowry which he had given
after the death of his daughter during marriage, the money ought to be
returned to the partnership, for we should interpret the contract
equitably in this way. If, however, the marriage should be dissolved by
a divorce during the existence of the partnership, the dowry would be
recovered with its accessories, so that it could again be given to
another husband. But if the first husband was not able to restore the
dowry, another could not be taken from the funds of the partnership,
unless this had been expressly agreed upon. In the example proposed,
however, it seems to be most probable that the dowry was actually paid,
or at least promised. For if the daughter had received the dowry by
operation of law, after she became the heir of her father, the money
ought not to be placed in the partnership fund, because she would be
entitled to it, even if there should be another heir. But, if she was
released by a receipt from her husband, money should not be credited to
the partnership which had not been paid.

82. *The Same, Opinions, Book III.*

One partner is not bound for the debts contracted by another, according
to the law of partnership, unless the money was deposited in the common
chest.

83. *Paulus, Manuals, Book I.*

The question arose whether, where a tree which grows on the boundary
line, or a stone which extends on each side of the line of two
contiguous tracts of land, will belong proportionately to the owner of
each tract; or, if the tree is cut down, or the stone removed, it will
remain undivided; as occurs where two masses of metal belonging to two
owners are melted together the entire mass becomes the common property
of both; and thus, in this instance where a tree is separated from the
soil, there is all the more reason for considering it to belong to both
owners, than is the case with a mass of metal; since it only forms one
body composed of the same substance. It is in accordance with natural
reason, however, that, after the separation of the stone or the tree,
each of the two owners should have the same share of the same to which
he was entitled while it remained in the earth.

84. *Labeo, Abridgments by Javolenus, Book VI.*

Whenever a partnership is formed by the direction of anyone, either with
the son of the latter or with another person, a direct action can be
brought against the one who was in view when the partnership was formed.


* * * * *
