# -*- mode: org -*-

BOOK X.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES...................
21

TITLE II. CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR THE PARTITION OF AN ESTATE..........
24

TITLE III.

CONCERNING ACTIONS FOR THE PARTITION OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON
..................................................... 47

TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR PRODUCTION
.......................... 58



THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK X.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES.

\1. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

The action for the establishment of boundaries is a personal one;
although it is a proceeding for the recovery of property.

\2. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

This action has reference to rustic estates, even though buildings are
situated between them; for it does not make much difference whether a
party plants trees, or erects a building on the boundary line.

\(1) A judge is permitted in the case of establishment of boundaries to
decide the controversy as seems to him best where he cannot fix the
boundaries; and if the judge, for the purpose of removing a doubt of
ancient origin chooses to direct the boundaries to be established in a
new direction, he can do so in this way, and order a sum of money to be
paid by way of compensation.

\3. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

In any case in which it is necessary that a decision should be made
giving the land of one of the parties to the other, the one in whose
favor the decision is rendered shall be required to pay to the other a
certain sum of money by way of compensation.

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

Where a controversy exists with reference to a certain piece of
real-estate the land can be divided into shares by means of a decree, in
accordance with what the judge finds to be the interest of the parties
in said land.

\(1) In a suit for the establishment of boundaries an account must be
taken of the interest of the parties; for example, where anyone obtains
some benefit from a tract of land which is ascertained to belong to a
neighbor, would it be unjust that payment should be required on that
account? Moreover, if a surveyor had been employed by one of the
parties, the other who did not employ him would be obliged to pay his
share of the compensation.

\(2) After issue has been joined in a case, account is taken of the
profits, for from that time negligence and malice must be made the
subject of investigation, but whatever is collected before issue is
joined will not, under any circumstances, be considered, for either the
party collected it in good faith, and he should be allowed the benefit
of it if he has consumed it; or, if he collected it in bad faith, an
action must be brought against him for its recovery.

\(3) Where, however, anyone refuses to obey the judge by cutting down a
tree, or removing a building erected on the boundary, or on some portion
of it, he will be required to make payment.

\(4) Where landmarks are alleged to have been thrown down or dug up; the
judge who has jurisdiction can hear an application to establish the
boundaries also.

\(5) Where one tract of land belongs to two persons and another to
three; the court can adjudge the tract which is in dispute to one side,
even though it includes several owners, since where the boundaries of
land are established, this is understood to be done rather for the
benefit of an estate than for that of a person; in this instance,
however, since the decision was for the benefit of several parties, each
one will be entitled to the same share which he has in the estate, and
which will be held in common.

\(6) Those who have shares in the common estate will not be liable to
payment to one another, for no judicial controversy appears to have
arisen between them.

\(7) If you and I have an estate in common, and I alone own an adjoining
tract of land, can legal proceedings be taken by us for the
establishment of boundaries? Pomponius states that there cannot, because
my joint-owner and myself cannot be adversaries in an. action of this
kind, but we are considered to occupy the place of one person. Pomponius
also says that even an equitable action cannot be granted, as the party
who holds property in his own right can alienate either what he held
jointly or severally, and then institute proceedings.

\(8) An action can be brought for the establishment of boundaries not
only between two estates, but even among three or more, as for instance,
where one estate and several others, even as many as three or four, are
contiguous.

\(9) An action for the establishment of boundaries can be brought where
lands are subject to perpetual lease; or between persons who have
usufructs in the different tracts; or between an usufructuary and a mere
owner of adjoining land; or between parties who have possession on
account of real property given by way of pledge.

\(10) This action is available where the boundary is between rustic
estates; it does not, however, apply in the case of urban estates; for
in the latter instance, the parties are not persons who have the same
boundary, but they are rather said to be neighbors, and their estates
are, for the most part, separated by common walls. Therefore, where
buildings are adjoining, even in the country, there is no ground for
this action; and, on the other hand, in a city there may be gardens
which are contiguous, so that here also an action can be brought for the
establishment of boundaries.

\(11) Where a river or a highway intervenes, it is not understood to be
a boundary; hence no suit can be brought for the establishment of a
boundary.

\5. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XV.*

Because the highway or the river constitutes my boundary, rather than
the land of my neighbor.

\6. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

But if a private stream intervenes, an action for the establishment of
boundaries can be brought.

\7. *Modestinus, Pandects, Book X.*

Arbiters are appointed to determine the dimensions of land; and he who
is stated to have a larger part of the entire tract will be compelled to
transfer a certain portion to the others who have smaller ones; and this
is stated in a rescript.

\8. *Ulpianus, Opinions, Book VI.*

Where an inundation destroys the boundaries of a field by the overflow
of the water, so as to afford an opportunity to any person to seize
places over which they have no right; the governor of the province must
order that they shall not interfere with the property of others, and
that the land of the owner shall be restored to him, and the boundaries
be fixed by a surveyor.

\(1) It is part of the duty of the magistrate in a case involving the
boundaries of land to send surveyors, and by means of them dispose of
the question of boundaries in accordance with justice, and by
examination with his own eyes, if occasion demands It.

\9. *Julianus, Digest, Book VIII.*

The case for the establishment of boundaries remains for hearing, even
though the common owners may have brought an action for partition, or
have sold the land.

\10. *The Same, Digest, Book LI.*

An action for partition among joint-owners or heirs, or one for the
establishment of boundaries is of such a nature that each individual
party has the double right of both plaintiff and defendant in the
action.

\11. *Papinianus, Opinions, Book II.*

With reference to inquiries as to boundaries, the ancient memorials, and
the authority of the census which had been taken before the suit was
brought, must be followed; provided it is proved that no changes have
resulted through a number of successions, and by the arbitrary acts of
possessors tracts of land have been either added or taken away, and the
boundaries subsequently altered.

\12. *Paulus, Opinions, Book III.*

In a question relating to ownership, attention must be paid to those
boundaries which a person who was the owner of both tracts designated
when he sold one of them; for it is not necessary that the boundaries
which formerly separated the two different tracts should be observed,
but the descriptions of the adjoining owners must be used to establish
the new boundaries between the said tracts of land.

\13. *Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables, Book IV.*

It should be remembered that in the action for the establishment of
boundaries the rule must be observed which, to a certain extent,
coincides with the plan of the one which Solon is said to have passed at
Athens, which is as follows: "Where a party builds a wall adjoining the
land of another, he must not go beyond the boundary; if it is a wall
built of masonry, he must leave a foot; if it is a house, two feet. If
he digs a grave or a ditch, he must leave an open space equal in width
to the depth of the same; if a well, the width of a pace. If he plants
an olive or a fig-tree, he must place it nine feet from the adjoining
land, and in the case of other trees he must leave five feet."

TITLE II.

CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR THE PARTITION OF AN

ESTATE.

\1. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

This action is derived from the Law of the Twelve Tables, for it was
considered necessary, where co-heirs desired to relinquish ownership in
common, that some kind of action should be established by which the
property of the estate might be distributed among them.

\(1) This action, in fact, can be brought directly by a party who is not
in possession of his share. Where, however, he who is in possession of
the estate denies that the plaintiff is his co-heir, he can bar him by
an exception stated as follows: "If the inheritance is not prejudiced
with reference to the matter in question." If the party possesses his
share, even though it may be denied that he is a co-heir, an exception
of this kind will not be a bar; the result of which is that, in this
instance, the judge himself who hears the case must determine whether
the party is a co-heir or not; for if he is not, nothing will be
adjudged to him, nor will his adversary be required to make him any
payment.

\2. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

By means of the action for the partition of an estate the latter can be
divided whether it is derived from a will or passes by intestacy, and
whether the estate is granted by the Law of the Twelve Tables, or by
some other law, or by a Decree of "the Senate, or even by an Imperial
Constitution. Generally speaking, an estate can be divided only between
those after whose death an action to recover it can be brought.

\(1) If a fourth of the estate is coming to anyone who was arrogated in
accordance with the Constitution of the Divine Pius, then, because a
party of this kind does not become either an heir or the possessor of
the property, a prætorian action will be necessary for the partition of
the estate.

\(2) Moreover, if the *peculium*^1^** of the son of a family who is a
soldier is in question, it can be forcibly asserted that an estate is
created by the Imperial Constitutions, and therefore this action will be
available.

\(3) In an action for the partition of an estate, each of the heirs
takes the part of both defendant and plaintiff.

^1^ The right of *peculium* was the privilege granted by the Civil Law
to a son or a slave, while under the control of his father or master, to
possess and enjoy property under certain restrictions. Every description
of property was included under the designation, whether it was real or
personal, and whether it consisted of written evidences of debt, rights
of action on obligations, bequests or devises. By a strange anomaly of
the Roman System a slave, although incapable of the absolute ownership
of anything, could hold another slave (known as a *vicarius*) in in
bondage as a part of his *peculium.*

There were many kinds of *peculium*, whose names were generally
indicative of their origin. The *peculium profectitium* was derived by
the son from the father either directly or indirectly; the *peculium
adventitium* was acquired through the mother or anyone else but the
father, or was what the child obtained by his own labor or other
exertions. *Peculium castrense *embraced whatever personal effects came
into the hands of a minor under paternal control as the result of
military service; of which booty taken in war, bequests of comrades in
arms, and rewards for bravery, constituted the principal portion. Under
the head of *peculium quasi castrense* were classed acquisitions from
professions, and public employments of every kind, excepting those of a
military character; such as fees obtained by the practice of law and
medicine, the salaries of teachers, and the emoluments of government
officials. *Peculium militare* was a general term including both
*castrense* and *quasi castrense; peculium paganum* was used to
designate both *profectitium* and *adventitium*, and was employed in
contradistinction to *militare.*

The consent of a father or a master was not indispensable to enable a
son or a slave to accumulate or hold *peculium* as, if it was not
specifically stated, it was always presumed. The legal ownership was
vested in the person possessing paternal or magisterial authority, and
the party under control could not, by testament or otherwise, dispose of
any property which was nominally his own, unless his superior had
expressly conferred upon him absolute power of alienation. The former
was responsible to the extent of the *peculium* for any contracts or
pecuniary obligations incurred, and he was personally liable for the
entire indebtedness if he had authorized it, or had, in any way,
profited by the transaction.

The liability of the master, so far as the business affairs of his
slaves were concerned, was an important consideration in the eye of
Roman jurisprudence. The pride of the Roman noble would not tolerate his
engaging in commercial pursuits, but he was, by no means, averse to the
advantages to be obtained from their successful exercise; hence he
employed his slaves  who were frequently men of fine education and
great financial ability  to act as his factors and brokers in

\(4) Again it cannot be doubted that an action for the partition of an
estate can be maintained where only a few heirs out of many institute
proceedings.

\(5) Although claims are not considered in this action, nevertheless, if
stipulations had been entered into with reference to the division of the
same, so that it is settled that each party shall assign rights of
action to the other and appoint him agent for the transaction of his
business, the division shall be adhered to.

\3. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

It is evident that it sometimes becomes the duty of the judge to see
that different debts and claims are assigned to different heirs in
severalty, because it often occurs that the payment or collection of
debts to be apportioned among different shares causes no small degree of
inconvenience. Still, this assignment does not always have the effect of
rendering a single heir liable for the entire indebtedness, or of giving
him the right to collect all of it, but the result merely is that if
proceedings are instituted, the heir brings them partly in his own name
and partly in the capacity of agent; or, where an action is brought
against him, he is sued partly in his own name and partly as agent.

Although the creditors are fully empowered to bring suit against each
individual heir; the latter still have a perfect right to substitute in
their places such parties as the order of the court indicates should
sustain the burden of the action.

the prosecution of mercantile and speculative ventures of every
description, which frequently involved the investment, expenditure, and
collection of vast sums of money; a large proportion of which was
classed as *peculium.*

Even if a slave was manumitted, he was not entitled to his *peculium,
*if his master desired to assert his right; but if while the latter was
living he failed to do so, he was understood to have relinquished his
claim. In all other instances than those above mentioned, at the death
or change of status of the slave, his *peculium* immediately passed into
the possession of his master.

The rigor of these rules was considerably relaxed under the Empire. The
*peculium castrense*, established by Augustus, was at the absolute
disposal of a son subordinated to parental authority, and this privilege
was afterwards extended to *quasi castrense* acquisitions by
Constantine. A Constitution of Justinian permitted a son to own property
which he had received or inherited from any relative other than the one
to whom he owed obedience, subject, however, to the usufruct of the
latter during his lifetime.

The Greeks, also, allowed slaves to hold and alienate property, provided
they paid a nominal sum annually to their masters; and the latter were
compelled to manumit them if they had accumulated enough to purchase
their freedom. (Potter, Antiquities of Greece, I, X, page 77.)

While the Hebrews were in captivity in Egypt they had cattle of their
own, and probably other possessions. (Exodus, IX, 4, 24, 25, 26.)

The unrestricted control of the property of a child by its father is
established by Mohammedan Law. "The father may discharge his personal
debt from the property of the minor. The same is the case with pledge."
(Syed Ameer Ali, Mohammedan Law, I, XXIII, 3.)

According to the rule of both English and American jurisprudence, a
child is absolutely incapable of owning property until it attains its
majority.

The Code of Louisiana permitted a slave to have *peculium* provided his
master gave his consent, but he could not alienate it. If he could have
inherited property if free, and if he had free descendants the
succession could pass through him to

\4. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

Therefore everything except pecuniary claims are included in this
proceeding. But if a pecuniary claim is bequeathed to one of several
heirs, the said heir can obtain it by a suit for partition of the
estate.

\(1) Noxious drugs and poisons are embraced in this action; but the
judge ought by no means to interfere in matters of this description, for
it is his duty to perform the functions of a good and innocent man. He
should act in the same manner with reference to books which it is
improper to read (for instance, those treating of magic and similar
subjects); all of these, however, should be immediately destroyed.

\(2) Moreover, where anything has been acquired by peculation or
sacrilege, or by violence, theft, or aggression, it shall not be
divided.

\(3) The judge should order the will to be placed in the hands of him
who is heir to the greater portion of the estate, or to be deposited in
a temple. Labeo says that where the estate is sold, a copy of the will
should be deposited, and that the heir should furnish a copy, but he
himself ought to keep the original will or deposit it in the temple.

\5. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

Where any inheritable obligations are included in the property of the
estate, the judge should take care that they remain in the possession of
the party who is heir to the largest share; the others are entitled to
copies which must be verified, and a bond shall be executed by the said
heir to the effect that the original documents will be produced when
occasion requires this to be done.

Where all the heirs are entitled to equal shares, and no agreement is
made between them with reference to the party with whom the instruments
are to be left, they must cast lots, or a friend should be chosen by
common consent or by vote with whom they may be deposited, or they must
be placed for safe keeping in some consecrated temple.

them. "All that a slave possesses belongs to his master, he possesses
nothing of his own but his *peculium*, that is to say, the sum of money,
or movable estate which his master chooses he shall possess.

"They can transmit nothing by alienation or otherwise." (Civil Code of
Louisiana Secs. 175, 176.) No other slave State conceded to a person in
bondage the right to even the precarious possession of property accorded
by Louisiana. Elsewhere, the slave was declared by statute to be
unqualifiedly a chattel personal, and hence legally incapable of even
conditional ownership. (Gooddell, The American Slave Code, Chap VI.)
(Stroud, A Sketch of the Laws Relating to Slavery, II, V.)

The Supreme Court of South Carolina, in an early case, held that one
slave could purchase another with the proceeds of his labor for the
purpose of emancipation, and in this manner acquire a temporary and
provisional ownership, although no claim to such ownership had been
asserted by the purchaser. The owner of the latter was decided to have
no interest in the slave who was the subject of the transaction, (Bay's
Reports, I, 260-263.)

Later rulings everywhere were absolutely at variance with this decision,
which was naturally considered as establishing a bad precedent.  ED.

\6. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

The settlement of the matter by submitting it to competition, so that
the party who makes the highest bid shall be entitled to possession of
the obligations, belonging to the estate, is not approved by either
Pomponius, or by myself.

\7. *Venuleius, Stipulations, Book VII.*

If an heir, in an instance where a co-heir was added under a condition,
or is in the hands of the enemy, should assert that he himself is the
heir, and having brought an action should gain it, and afterwards the
condition upon which the inheritance of the other heir depended is
fulfilled, or the latter returns by *postliminium;* ought the other heir
to share with him the advantages of his victory? He is undoubtedly
entitled to an action to enforce judgment for the entire amount. In this
case the co-heir should be granted his choice, that is to say, he must
either be given a share of the estate or he must have the power to
institute proceedings, for he is one who became an heir, or returned to
the city, after his co-heir had been successful. The same rule must be
observed where a posthumous child is born. These parties are not to
blame on account of their silence, since they only obtained a right to
the estate after their co-heir had won his case.

\8. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

Pomponius says that where accounts are bequeathed as a preferred legacy
to one of several heirs, they must not be delivered to him before his
co-heirs have taken copies of the same. For, he says, suppose a slave
who is a steward was bequeathed, he should not be delivered until he has
rendered his accounts. We should consider whether a bond ought not to be
executed providing that whenever the accounts are required, or the said
steward bequeathed, they shall be produced; as it is frequently
necessary that the original accounts and the steward himself should be
produced in court for the explanation of matters which subsequently
arise and in which the knowledge of the steward is involved; and it is
necessary that a bond should be furnished the co-heir in this matter by
the heir aforesaid.

\(1) Pomponius also states that pigeons which are accustomed to leave
the pigeon-house are included in the action for the partition of an
estate, because they are our property as long as they have the custom of
returning to us; and therefore if anyone should seize them, we are
entitled to an action for theft.

The same rule applies to bees, because they are part of our property.

\(2) Moreover, where one of our cattle is carried off by wild beasts,
Pomponius thinks that if it escapes from said beasts it is to be
included in the action for the partition of an estate; for he says it is
the better opinion that, where anything is carried off by a wolf or any
other wild beast, it does not cease to be ours so long as it is not
devoured.

\9. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

This action also includes property which the heirs have acquired by
usucaption, in instances where it was delivered to the deceased, and
also property which was delivered to the heirs, and which the deceased
had purchased.

\10. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

Also real property which belongs to our patrimony as well as land held
by perpetual lease, or such as relates merely to the surface. Property
of which the deceased had possession in good faith, even although it
belonged to another, likewise comes under this rule.

\11. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

The child of a female slave, if it is born after the estate has been
entered upon,

\12. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

And even after issue had been joined can, as Sabinus states, be included
in an action for the partition of an estate, and be made the subject of
adjudication.

\(1) The same principle will apply where anything is given by a stranger
to slaves forming a portion of the assets of an estate.

\(2) Property bequeathed under a condition in the meantime belongs to
the heirs, and is therefore included in the action for the partition of
an estate, and can be made the subject of adjudication; subject of
course, to the restrictions attaching to the same, so that if the
condition is fulfilled it will be taken away from the party to whom it
was adjudged; or, upon failure of the condition, it will revert to those
charged with the bequest.

The same rule applies in the case of a slave who is to be liberated on a
condition, for in the meantime he belongs to the heirs, but when the
condition has been fulfilled he obtains his freedom.

\13. *Papinianus, Questions, Book VII.*

Disposal of property after issue has been joined is forbidden, but this
only applies to such as is voluntary, and not to such as becomes
necessary through some former liability and originates in some legal
requirement.

\14. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

But where the right of usucaption has begun to run before issue is
joined in favor of a party who is not an heir, and is subsequently
completed, this removes the property from the case.

\(1) The question arises whether an usufruct is embraced in the action;
as, for example, where an usufruct was reserved and the land left to
others than the heir:

\15. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

Or where an usufruct was bequeathed to a slave belonging to the estate;
as an usufruct cannot depart from the party in interest without being
lost.

\16. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

I think that it is part of the duty of the judge that, if the heirs
should wish to relinquish their common ownership of the usufruct, he
should accede to their wishes after causing them to give security to one
another.

\(1) Julianus says that where a Court adjudges the land to one heir and
the usufruct of the same to another, the usufruct does not become common
property.

\(2) An usufruct can be adjudged from a certain time, or until a certain
time, or for alternate years.

\(3) Land which a river adds by alluvium to an estate after issue is
joined is also included in an action of this kind.

\(4) Where, however, an act has been committed maliciously or
negligently by one of the heirs whose effect is to diminish the value of
the usufruct, Pomponius says that this likewise comes within the scope
of the action; for everything which an heir maliciously or negligently
does to the damage of the estate will be considered in all actions for
partition of the same, provided always that he commits the act in the
capacity of heir. Therefore, if one of the heirs deprived the testator
of money during his lifetime, this will not be included in the action
for partition of the estate, because he was not yet an heir; but where
he acted as an heir, even though the party interested should be entitled
to some other action, nevertheless, as Julianus states, he is liable to
a suit for partition of the estate.

\(5) Finally, he says that if any one of the heirs should destroy
accounts belonging to the estate or falsify them, he will be liable
under the *Lex Aquilia* for destroying the same, and he will also be
liable to an action for partition of the estate.

\(6) Moreover, where a slave who belongs to an estate steals the
property of one of the heirs, Ofilius says that an action for partition
of the estate will lie, as well as one for the partition of property
held in common, but an action for theft cannot be brought; and hence if
the heir brings an action for partition of the estate he will obtain a
judgment by which the slave will be given to him, or the damages
assessed, that is to say simple damages will be granted him.

\17. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

Where an injury is committed by one of the heirs, it is proper to state
that simple damages should be considered in the action for partition of
the estate.

\18. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

In accordance with these rules, Julianus says that where there are
several heirs, and a slave is left to one of them, in general terms,
with the right of selection, and the remaining heirs allege that Stichus
has falsified the will or defaced it, and they make this statement in
order to avoid a slave being chosen; and then, after he has been chosen
an action is brought to recover him, they can, if they are sued, avail
them-

selves of an exception on the ground of malicious fraud and subject the
slave to torture.

\(1) The question arises whether in an action for the partition of an
estate the heirs have a right to use torture with reference to the death
of the testator, or to that of his wife and children; and Pomponius very
properly says that these things have no reference whatever to the
division of the assets of the estate.

\(2) He also says that where anyone provides by will that a slave shall
be sold in order to be transported to a distance, it is the duty of the
judge to see that the wishes of the deceased shall not be thwarted.

But where the testator ordered that a monument should be erected, an
action for the partition of an estate can be brought to compel this to
be done. He suggests, however, that since it is to the interest of the
heirs  as they will have a right in the monument  any one of them can
institute proceedings in express terms to have a monument erected.

\(3) Where one of the heirs incurs expenses in good faith, he can
collect interest from a co-heir from the time of his default, in
accordance with a Rescript of the Emperors Severus and Antoninus.

\(4) Celsus also very appropriately adds that a co-heir, even if he does
not make payment himself, nevertheless, is entitled to an action for
partition of the estate to compel his co-heir to pay his share; as,
otherwise, the creditor will not relinquish a certain piece of property
unless he is paid in full.

\(5) Where the son of a family was his father's heir to a share of the
estate and was sued by creditors for his *peculium*, he being prepared
to pay all that was due, he can, by means of an exception on the ground
of malicious fraud, compel the creditors to assign their rights of
action to him; and he is, in addition, entitled to an action for the
partition of an estate against his co-heirs.

\(6) Where one of the heirs has paid a legacy to a party who is directed
by the court to take possession for the purpose of preserving legacies;
Papinianus thinks, and his opinion is correct, that he is entitled to an
action for the partition of the estate against his co-heirs; because the
legatee would not otherwise give up the possession which he had once
obtained, it being equivalent to security, until the entire legacy was
paid to him.

\(7) Moreover, if anyone should pay a debt to Titius to avoid the sale
of a pledge, Neratius states that he can institute proceedings for
partition of the estate.

\19. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

Again, on the other hand, the judge ought to provide in like manner
that, where one of the heirs has pecuniarily profited by the property of
the estate, or has entered into a stipulation to its disadvantage, he
shall not be the only one to be benefited. The judge can accomplish this
by either causing accounts to be rendered by the different heirs, or by
causing them to give security to one another by means of which the
profits and losses will be equally divided between them.

\20. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

Where a married daughter who was obliged to bring her dowry into the
common fund, through an error of her co-heirs gave a bond that she would
pay them in proportion to their shares whatever she recovered from her
husband; Papinianus says that, notwithstanding this, the arbiter in the
action for partition must decide that even if she herself should die
while the marriage existed the dowry must be contributed; for ignorance
of the co-heirs can not change the rules which govern legal proceedings.

\(1) Where the son of a family has become liable to an obligation by
order of his father, he must reserve the amount out of the assets to pay
the debt; and, moreover, if he has expended money on property belonging
to his father, the same rule will apply, and if the action is *de
peculio* he will reserve the *peculium* for the same purpose; and this
our Emperor stated in the Rescript.

\(2) In addition to this, where the son of a family is appointed heir,
he can reserve the dowry of his wife; nor is this unreasonable, since he
must sustain the pecuniary burdens of matrimony. Therefore, he can
retain the entire dowry, and must furnish security that he will defend
his co-heirs who may be sued on the stipulation. The same rule applies
where another party gave the dowry and entered into the stipulation.
This is applicable not only to the dowry of his own wife, but also to
that of his son's wife, since this also has reference to the expenses of
matrimony for which he is responsible: because he is required to be
liable for the expenses of his son and daughter-in-law. Marcellus says
that the son must retain the dowry, not only where it was given to his
father but also where it was given to himself, as his son; to the extent
that it was given to him as being included in his *peculium*, or where
it was expended for the benefit of his father.

\(3) Where a father divides his property among his sons without any
writing, and distributes the burden of his debts among them in
proportion to what they possess; Papinianus says that this should not be
considered a simple gift, but rather a division of property under a last
will. It is clear, he says, that if the creditors bring suit against
said heirs in proportion to their shares in the estate, and one of them
refuses to abide by what was agreed upon, an action can be brought
against him on special grounds, alleging that they made an exchange
under a certain agreement; of course if all the property was divided.

\(4) The action for the partition of an estate cannot be brought more
than once, unless proper cause is shown; because if any property is left
undivided, an action can be brought for its distribution.

\(5) Papinianus says that if one of the heirs is required to pay a debt
without this being provided for by way of a legacy; then the heir will
be forced to assume payment by the judge presiding in the action for
partition of the estate, but not for a greater amount than three
quarters of his share, so that he may have one quarter undiminished; and
therefore he must provide security to protect his co-heirs.

\(6) He also says that if a son is liable for expenses which he has
incurred on account of a public office that his father consented for him

to administer, and is then appointed heir to a share of the estate, he
can reserve the amount which he owes, because this was one of his
father's debts; but where he administered any offices after the death of
his father, the heirs of the latter will not be liable for any
obligations incurred with reference to said offices.

\(7) Neratius, however, gave it as his opinion that where a man who had
several sons consented that one of them should undertake the office of
the functionary who has charge of arranging and regulating public games,
and, before he perform the duties of the office, his father should die,
after having appointed all his sons his heirs; the question arises
whether the said son could, by an action for partition of the estate
recover what he had expended in the matter; and he answered he could not
recover it by any action. This opinion is not accepted, and very justly,
for the expense should be included in the action for partition of the
estate.

\(8) Papinianus also says that if a husband orders one of his heirs to
assume the burden of paying the dowry, which is included in a
stipulation, and his widow brings suit for her dowry against both heirs,
the heir who was ordered to assume the burden must defend his coheir in
the action. But where both heirs are charged with the payment of
legacies instead of the dowry, and the widow elects to receive the
dowry, the legacies are retained by said heirs, but this must not be for
the benefit of the co-heir who is released from payment of the debt;
that is to say, the co-heir who assumed the burden of the debt, should,
by order of the court, obtain the legacy; and this is true unless the
testator provided otherwise.

\(9) He also says that where a slave who is to be liberated on a
condition pays money out of his* peculium* to one of several co-heirs,
for the purpose of fulfilling the condition, it will not be included in
this action, and should not be subject to contribution.

\21. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

The same rule applies in the case of an action brought for the partition
of property held in common.

\22. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

Moreover, Labeo says that if one of the heirs digs up any treasure which
the testator left, he will be liable to an action for partition, just as
if he had divided the treasure with a stranger who was aware of the
fact.

\(1) The judge in an action for the partition of an estate can adjudge
the same property to several parties only where the right to have one
thing was left to several persons; (or where, as Pomponius says, the
necessity existed that the shares should be adjudged to several
persons); or where the judge assigns a certain part of the property to
each of the co-heirs; he can, however, adjudge the property to one heir
after it has been bid for by all.

\(2) Moreover, no one doubts that he can adjudge land that has been
divided in accordance with the distribution which has already taken
place.

\(3) Again, when he makes these adjudications he can impose a servitude
so as to make one tract which he assigned serve another; and if he
absolutely adjudges a tract to one heir, he cannot, in assigning
another, impose a servitude upon the first one.

\(4) An action for the partition of an estate has reference to two
matters; that is to say, the property, and delivery of the same, these
being personal actions.

\(5) Papinianus criticizes Marcellus for his opinion concerning property
held by the enemy, because he does not think that transfers of property
of this kind are included in the action for the partition of an estate.
For how can there be any impediment to an action for the transfer of
property when the very property itself is included,

\23. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

On account of the hope of *postliminium?* Of course a bond should be
given, because the party might not return; unless there was only an
estimate made of an event that was uncertain.

\24. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

Where, however, property has ceased to be in existence, the question of
transfer may still arise; and I agree with Papinianus.

\(1) The action for partition applies to the possessors of the property
of an estate, and also to a party to whom an estate has been restored in
accordance with the Trebellian Decree of the Senate, and to other
Prætorian successors.

\25. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

The heirs of a person who died in the hands of the enemy can bring this
suit.

\(1) Where a soldier makes one person an heir to his castrensian
property and another an heir to the remainder of his estate, there is no
ground for an action for partition; since the property will be divided
between the heirs according to the Imperial Constitution, just as a suit
for the partition of an estate cannot be brought where there is no
corporeal property, but the assets all consist of claims.

\(2) With reference to the point as to whether a party is entitled to
undertake the defence in an action for partition, it makes no difference
whether he has possession of the estate or not.

\(3) Where several estates are held in common by different persons under
different titles, a single action in partition can be brought.

\(4) Where the Titian estate is held in common by you and me, and that
of the estate of Seius is held by you and Titius and myself, Pomponius
says that one action can be brought to which all three persons will be
parties.

\(5) Moreover, where several estates are held by us in common, we can
proceed by an action for partition with reference to one of them alone.

\(6) Where a testator holds property in common with a stranger, or
bequeathed to anyone a portion of his property; or his heir, before

joinder of issue in an action for partition, alienated his own share; it
is the duty of the judge to order that the share which was the property
of the testator should be transferred to some one.

\(7) Where a co-heir has possession of property as a purchaser, or, for
instance, has received it as a gift; Pomponius denies that it can be
included in an action for partition of the estate.

\(8) He also says if you and I become the heirs of Titius, and you bring
an action against Sempronius for a portion of a tract of land all of
which you say is included in the estate, and you are defeated; and I
then purchase the same share from Sempronius and it is transferred to
me, and you bring an action for partition, this will not only not
include what I am in possession of as heir, but will not even embrace
what I hold as purchaser; for, as it was evident by the former decree
that the entire tract of land was not included in the estate, how could
it be included in a suit for the partition of the latter?

\(9) It is doubtful whether a stipulation, the terms of which give each
heir a right of action for the entire amount, is included in a suit of
this kind; as for instance, where a party dies after having stipulated
for a right of way, a path or a driveway, for the reason that a
stipulation of this kind according to the Law of the Twelve Tables is
not permitted to be divided, because this cannot be done. The better
opinion, however, is that it is not included in the action, but that all
the heirs have a right to bring suit for the entire amount; and if the
right of way is not furnished, the decision against the defendant should
be for a sum of money in proportion to the share of the plaintiff in the
estate.

\(10) On the other hand, where a person who promises a right of way dies
after having appointed several heirs, the obligation is not divided; and
there is no doubt that it continues to exist, since a party can promise
a right of way who has no land. Therefore, since each individual heir is
liable for the whole, it is the duty of the judge to require bonds to be
furnished, so that if any one of the heirs should be sued and pay the
damages assessed by the Court, he can recover a portion of the amount
from the others.

\(11) The same rule applies where a testator bequeaths a right of way.

\(12) In the case of a different stipulation also, where a testator
promised that nothing should be done by him or by his heir to prevent
the other party from walking or driving, since, if one co-heir should
prevent this a suit for the entire amount can be brought under the
stipulation, the interests of the co-heir must be protected to prevent
the act of one of them being prejudicial to the others.

\(13) The same rule of law applies to a sum of money promised by a
testator, if it was promised under a penalty; for although this
obligation may, according to the Law of the Twelve Tables, be divided;
still, for one party to pay his share will not in any way contribute to
the avoidance of the penalty, yet, if the money has not been paid, or is
not due, recourse must be had to a bond, so that provision may be made
for the indemnity of the others by the party who is to blame for all the

money not being paid; or each one must give security that he will make
good a part to whoever pays the whole amount; or where one of the heirs
pays the entire sum promised by the testator in order to prevent the
penalty from attaching, he can recover from his co-heirs their shares of
the same in an action for partition.

\(14) The same rule is observed in the redemption of pledges, for unless
a tender is made of the entire amount which is due, the creditor can
legally sell the pledge.

\(15) Where one of several co-heirs defends an hereditary slave in a
noxal action, and tenders the amount of estimated damages, where this is
expedient, he can by this action recover a part of what was paid.

The same rule applies where one co-heir gives security with reference to
legacies, to prevent the legatees from being placed in possession. And,
generally speaking, where measures cannot be taken for a division, if
one party should act under the force of necessity, there will be ground
for an action in partition.

\(16) A co-heir is responsible not only for malice but also for
negligence committed with reference to the assets of an estate, since we
do not contract with the co-heir but happen upon him accidentally;
still, a co-heir is not obliged to be accountable for as much diligence
as the careful head of a family would exercise, as he had good reason
for acting on account of his own share; and therefore he would not be
entitled to an action on the ground of business transacted, hence he
must therefore employ the same diligence which he would display in his
own affairs. It is the same where property is bequeathed to two
legatees; for it was not their consent but the circumstances of the case
which united them in ownership.

\(17) Where a slave is bequeathed in indefinite terms and the legatee
afterwards dies, and one of the heirs of said legatee, by not giving his
consent, prevents the legacy from being paid, he who caused the
hindrance shall be compelled, by means of this action, to pay to the
others whatever the interest of each amounts to. The same rule applies
where, on the other hand, one of the heirs at whose charge a slave has
been bequeathed in general terms, being such a one as they themselves
might select, is unwilling to consent that a slave should be delivered
whom it would be beneficial to all to have thus disposed of, and, in
consequence, the heirs are sued by the legatee and compelled to pay, by
way of damages, a larger sum than the slave is worth.

\(18) Moreover, a man is liable on account of negligence who, after he
had entered upon an estate before others, suffered servitudes attached
to lands belonging to the estate to be lost by want of use.

\(19) Where a judgment is rendered against a son who was defending his
father in a suit, and he pays the amount of the judgment either during
the lifetime of his father or after his death; it can very properly be
stated that he has a right to bring suit for recovery against his coheir
in an action for partition.

\(20) A judge who presides in an action for partition of an estate
should leave nothing undivided.

\(21) He must also provide that security be given to those to whom he
awards the estate against recovery of the property by eviction.

\(22) When money which is not left in the house is bequeathed to be
taken before division, whether the co-heirs should pay the entire
amount, or only what is in proportion to their shares in the estate;
just as if the money had been left among the remaining property of the
estate is a question with reference to which some doubt exists; but the
better opinion is that what must be paid is the amount that would be
paid if the money had been found.

\26. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

It is part of the duty of the judge to order one or more things
belonging to the estate to be sold, and the proceeds of the sale to be
paid to any person to whom said money was bequeathed.

\27. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

In this action judgment must be rendered against every party, or all
must be discharged from liability; hence, if the decision is omitted
with reference to any one whomsoever, what the judge does with reference
to the others will not be valid; because a decision cannot be valid with
respect to one part of the question at issue, and void with respect to
another.

\28. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

Where a testator bequeaths property to be taken before division, which
he has already pledged to a creditor; it is in the province of the judge
to redeem it out of the common fund of the estate, and see that he to
whom it was bequeathed in this way shall have it.

\29. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book IV.*

Where property was given to the deceased by way of pledge, it must be
said to be included in the action for partition of the estate; but he to
whom it is awarded should be required to pay his co-heir for the same in
proportion to his share of the estate in an action for partition; but he
need not give security to his co-heir that he shall be indemnified with
reference to the party who pledged the property; for the reason that the
case will be the same as if an hypothecarian or Servian Action had been
brought, and the estimated amount had been tendered; so that the party
who made the tender may be protected by an exception against the owner
bringing suit to recover the property.

Again, on the other hand, if the heir to whom the pledge was adjudged
desires to restore the whole, he should be heard, even though the debtor
be unwilling. The same rule does not apply where the creditor purchases
the other portion of the property pledged, because adjudication by the
court is necessary, but the purchase is voluntary; unless the objection
should be made that the creditor bid for the property too eagerly. The
reason why this is taken into account is because what the creditor did
must be considered as if the debtor had done it through an agent, and
whatever necessary expenses the creditor incurred he has a right to
recover in an action besides.

\30. *Modestinus, Opinions, Book VI.*

I hold a tract of land in common with a female minor who is also my
co-heir, and in said land remains are buried to which reverence is due
from both of us; for the parents of the minor are buried there. Her
guardians, however, desire to sell the land, but to this I do not
consent, as I prefer to retain possession of my own share, since I
cannot purchase it all, and I wish to discharge my duty to the dead in
accordance with my own judgment. I ask whether I can legally petition
for an arbiter in an action for the partition of said tract of land; or
whether the arbiter who is appointed for the partition of an estate can
discharge the functions of his office and also divide the said property
between us according to the rights of each; the remaining assets of the
estate being left out of consideration. Herennius Modestinus answered
that there was nothing in what was proposed to hinder the party
appointed arbiter in the action for the partition of the estate from
including in his duties the matter of dividing the said tract of land;
but religious places could not be brought into the action, as the rights
with respect to them belong to the individual heirs interested in the
entire estate.

\31. *Papinianus, Questions, Book VII.*

Where a slave who is pledged is redeemed by one of the heirs, then, even
if he should afterwards die, the office of the arbiter will,
nevertheless, continue to exist; for there is sufficient reason for this
on account of the joint ownership which previously existed and would
have continued to exist up to this time, if the property had not been
destroyed.

\32. *The Same, Opinions, Book II.*

Property which a father has not divided among his children, after having
given them rights of action instead of the division, belongs to said
children in proportion to their respective shares in the estate,
provided he did not give the property which he did not divide in general
terms to one child; or it was not accessory to the property which was
given.

\33. *The Same, Opinions, Book VII.*

Where the father of a family, in devising land to his respective heirs,
wished to act the part of an arbiter in the partition; one co-heir will
not be compelled to surrender his share unless he obtains in return for
the same a share which is free from the incumbrance of the pledge.

\34. *The Same, Opinions, Book VIII.*

Where a valuation is placed upon slaves by co-heirs at the time of
division, it has been held that prices are placed upon them not for the
purpose of purchase, but for that of division; hence, if any of them
dies while the condition is pending, the loss must be borne by both the
heir and the beneficiary.

\35. *The Same, Opinions, Book XII.*

Pomponius Philadelphus transferred certain tracts of land by way of
dowry to a daughter who was under his control, and directed that the

income of the same should be paid to his son-in-law. The question arose
whether the daughter could retain the property as her own if her father
appointed all his children heirs. I answered that she would have good
cause to retain possession of the same, since her father wishes the land
in question to be given by way of dowry, and that the marriage had
continued even after the death of the father; for the case under
consideration was that the daughter held possession of the property
according to natural law by virtue of the dowry which she was capable of
receiving.

\36. *Paulus, Questions, Book II.*

I, being under the impression that you were my co-heir, although this
was not true, brought an action for partition against you, and
adjudications were made and orders issued by the Court, to make payment
to both of us. I ask whether, when the truth of the facts is
ascertained, a personal action will lie in favor of each of us, or one
to recover the property; also whether one rule is to be adopted with
reference to a party who is an heir, and another with reference to one
which is not. I answered that where a person is heir to an entire estate
and, thinking that Titius is his co-heir, joins issue with him in an
action in partition, and a decision directing payment is rendered, he
makes payment; then, since he did this in compliance with the decision
of the judge, he cannot bring an action to recover the money. You,
however, seem to hold that no action in partition can exist except
between coheirs; but although the action is not legal, still, it is
sufficient to prevent the suit to recover what the party believed he was
obliged to pay.

But, if neither of the parties was an heir, yet joined issue in an
action for partition just as if they were heirs, the same rule for
recovering the property which we previously stated applies to one of
them must be said is applicable to both. It is evident that, if they
divided the property without application to the court, it may be stated
that the heir who thought the other party was his co-heir has a right of
action for the transfer of the property delivered to the latter; for it
cannot be held that there was any compromise between them since he
believed him to be his co-heir.

\37. *Scævola, Questions, Book XII.*

A party who brings an action for the partition of an estate does not
admit that his adversary is his co-heir.

\38. *Paulus, Opinions, Book III.*

Lucius and Titia, who were brother and sister, having been emancipated
by their father, when grown up had curators appointed for them, and the
latter furnished them individually with money which was common property,
having been obtained from the income of an estate. They subsequently
divided the entire estate between them, and, after the division, Titia,
the sister, instituted proceedings against her brother alleging that he
had received more than she had; while, in fact, Lucius had not received
more than his share, but even less than half the property. I ask whether
Titia had a right of action against her brother? Paulus answered that:
"In accordance with the statement of the case, if

Lucius did not receive more from the income of the property held in
common than he was entitled to on account of his share in the estate,
his sister has no right of action against him." He gave the same answer
in a case where it was alleged that a brother had received a larger
amount for maintenance from the Prætor than his sister, but still not
more than half.

\39. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

Where a person was appointed heir to a share of an estate with reference
to which an action had been brought against the heirs because they did
not avenge the death of the testator, he gained his case, and the
co-heir then brought suit to recover his share from the other heir, but
refused to pay his allotment of the expense incurred in the defence of
the other suit. The question arose whether he would be barred by an
exception on the ground of fraud? I answered that if greater expenses
had been incurred by reason of the defence which he had made for the
benefit of the said co-heir himself, this expense must be taken into
consideration; but if the other party did not plead an exception on the
ground of fraud, he could bring suit for the recovery of part of the
expenses.

\(1) A man who died intestate divided all his land and other property
among his children by means of codicils, in such a way that he left a
great deal more to his son than to his daughter. The question arose
whether the sister had a right to bring her dowry into the common fund
for the benefit of the brother? I answered that, according to the
statement of facts, if the testator left nothing undivided, the better
opinion was that the right to bring the dowry into the common fund was
removed by the wish of the testator.

\(2) A testator granted freedom to a slave, who was fifteen years of
age, when he should reach the age of thirty; and also indicated that he
desired that there should be given him from the day of his death, as
long as the slave lived, ten *denarii* for his food, and twenty-five
*denarii* for his clothes. Stichus died before the day when he was to
become free arrived, and the question arose whether the legacy relating
to food and clothing was valid; and whether, if it was not valid, the
heir who had paid it could recover it from his co-heir with whom the
slave had lived? I answered that if the money had not been due, but if
what had been given had been expended for food, it could not be
recovered.

\(3) A son who, after the death of his father, contracted debts due to
the Government, cannot charge his brother with said debts in proportion
to his share in the estate of his father, if the brothers are not
partners in all their property; even though they held the estate of
their father in common, and their father had discharged the duty of a
magistrate where he resided in behalf of his other son.

\(4) A testator appointed his two sons his heirs, and before
distribution bequeathed certain slaves to each of them; among said
slaves a certain Stephanus was left to one of the sons together with his
*peculium.* The said slave, having been manumitted during the lifetime
of the testator, died, and afterwards the father died. The question then
arose

whether what Stephanus had in his *peculium* before he was manumitted
belonged to both sons, or only to the one to whom he had been previously
bequeathed together with his *peculium?* I answered that, according to
the statement of the case, it belonged to both.

\(5) A father who divided his property between his sons and confirmed
the division by his will, provided that any debt which either of them
had contracted or should contract, he alone should be liable for the
same. One of his sons having afterwards borrowed money, the father
appeared, and with his consent the land which had been transferred to
the said son was pledged for the debt, and after the death of the father
the same son who was in possession of the land paid the interest, I ask
whether, if the creditor should sell the land which was pledged,
anything should be paid to this son by a co-heir if an action for
partition of the estate should be brought? I answered that, in
accordance with the facts stated, he would not be required to pay
anything.

\40. *Gaius, Trusts, Book II.*

Where anyone who is appointed heir to an entire estate is asked to
deliver a certain portion of it to me, for instance, half; an equitable
action for partition can properly be brought between us.

\41. *Paulus, Decrees, Book I.*

A certain woman appealed from the decision of a judge because, as she
stated, in an action for the partition of an estate between herself and
the co-heir, he had divided not only the property but the freedmen also,
as well as an obligation for maintenance directed by the testator to be
furnished to certain freedmen; which, she alleged was something that he
had no right to do. On the other hand, it was stated that the parties
had agreed to the division, and had paid sums for maintenance in
accordance with the terms of the division for many years. It was decided
that they must abide by the provision for maintenance; but the judge
added that the division of freedmen was of no effect.

\42. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

Where a legacy is bequeathed to one of several heirs in the following
terms, "Let him retain what he owes me;" it is the duty the judge has in
an action for partition to prevent the co-heirs from exacting payment
from the heir aforesaid; but, where one heir is ordered to retain what
another owes, it is the duty of the judge to require the rights of
action to be assigned to him in proportion to the share of a co-heir in
the estate.

\43. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

One person can petition for the appointment of an arbiter in an action
for the partition of an estate; for it is clear that a single heir can
appeal to a judge, and therefore one heir can petition for an arbiter,
even though the others are present and do not give their consent.

\44. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

Proceedings may be instituted for the partition of land held in common
by co-heirs in such a way that only the property which is held in common
and matters relating to it which are pending in court shall be included;
but with reference to all other things the right of action for the
partition of the estate remains unimpaired.

\(1) Where an action for the partition of an estate or for the division
of property held in common has been tried; the Prætor will sustain any
decisions made by the Court by granting exceptions or actions.

\(2) Where co-heirs have sold property while one of their number was
absent, and in the transaction have managed fraudulently to obtain more
than they were entitled to, they can be compelled to indemnify the party
who was absent, either by an action for partition or by a suit for the
estate.^1^

\(3) Any of the profits which an heir takes from the funds of an estate
before it has been entered upon, Julianus says he will not have to
surrender in an action for partition; unless when he took the same he
knew that the land belonged to the estate.

\(4) Parties who bring actions for the partition of an estate, or for
the division of common property, or for the establishment of boundaries
are both plaintiffs and defendants; and therefore they must swear that
they have not instituted proceedings for the purpose of annoyance, and
do not make a defence with the intention of causing unnecessary trouble.

\(5) Where one of several co-heirs, on account of a stipulation relating
to the estate, makes a payment through his own act, he cannot recover
the amount from his co-heir; as, for instance, where the deceased
promised that no malicious fraud should be committed by himself or by
his heir, and that nothing should be done either by himself or by his
heir which would prevent anyone from walking or driving over a road;
and, in fact, even where the remaining heirs became liable through the
act of one, for the reason that the condition of a stipulation relating
to the estate is fulfilled, they will be entitled to an action for the
partition of the estate against the party through whom the stipulation
became operative.

\(6) Where anyone stipulates that Titius and his heir shall ratify some
act of his, and Titius dies leaving several heirs, he alone will be
liable who neglected ratification; and, among the heirs of the party

^1^ The *petitio hereditatis* was a proceeding instituted by an heir
when another party was in possession of some or all of the assets of the
estate. The amount for which he brought suit was, of course, dependent
upon his own interest, and whether his claim was fully or partly
established judgment was rendered accordingly. The scope of the action
embraced not only property which had belonged to the deceased, but also
deposits, pledges, rents, rights of action, legacies, acquisitions by
slaves, and all other personal accessions, even such benefits as had
been lost by the negligence of the person in possession, or any articles
which he had fraudulently disposed of. All debtors to the estate, as
well as purchasers of property forming part of its assets could be made
defendants in this action.  ED.

stipulating, he alone who has been sued can institute proceedings to
enforce the liability.

\(7) Where an usufruct is bequeathed to a widow "until her dowry shall
be paid to her;" then, Cassius says that whatever is paid to her by way
of dowry on behalf of a co-heir can be recovered by order of the arbiter
in an action for partition, and the co-heir can be made to pay his share
of the dowry; and this opinion is correct.

\(8) Where two co-heirs have been charged to erect a statue, and one of
them neglects to do so but the other erects it; Julianus says that it is
not unjust to grant an action in partition, so that a part of the
expenses may be paid, the amount of which would be approved by a good
citizen.

\45. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

Where you contend that part of an estate is owned by yourself and me in
common, which I, for some other reason, declare to be mine alone; this
is not included in the action for the partition of an estate.

\(1) Fraud committed by a slave of the heir does not come within the
terms of the action for the partition of an estate, unless there was
negligence on the part of the owner of the slave in that he employed a
slave which was not trustworthy to take care of the common property.

\46. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.*

Where a husband is appointed heir by his father under a certain
condition, in the meantime the right of action for the dowry of the wife
is in abeyance; for it is evident that if a divorce should take place
after the death of her father-in-law although at a time when the
condition of the appointment of the party as heir was still pending, it
must be held that there is ground for the retention of the dowry;
because, when the father dies, some things pass to the sons even before
they become heirs, such as matters relating to marriage, children and
guardianship. Therefore, a son who bore the expenses of matrimony after
his father's death can take the dowry before division; and this was held
by our Scævola.

\47. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXL*

In an action for the partition of an estate or for the division of
property held in common, if, while the case is pending, a controversy
arises concerning a right attaching to the land, it is established that
all those with reference to whom the arbiter has been appointed can both
bring suit and give notice of a new structure, each one in proportion to
his respective interest in the property; and when an award is made by
the arbiter, if the entire tract of land is adjudged to one party,
security must be furnished that whatever is recovered by means of the
actions must be delivered, and whatever expenses have been incurred on
their account must be paid. And if, while the matter was in court, no
proceedings were instituted with reference to the said land, the
unimpaired right of action shall belong to him to whom the

entire tract has been awarded, or in proportion to the share for which
the award was made.

\(1) Moreover, where there is any movable property which can be included
in said actions, and in the meantime it should be stolen, proceedings
for theft can be brought by the parties at whose risk the said property
was.

\48. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XII.*

Where a suit has been brought either for the partition of an estate, for
the division of property held in common, or for the establishment of
boundaries, and one of the parties should die leaving several heirs; the
case cannot be separated into parts, but all the heirs must either
accept it as it is, or they must appoint some one as agent against whom
suit may be brought as the representative of all of them.

\49. *Ulpianus, Disputations, Book II.*

A certain man was appointed heir to a share of an estate and having been
ordered by the Prætor to bury the testator, he sold a slave who had been
granted his freedom by the will, and promised the purchaser double
damages in case of eviction, and suit having been brought against him on
account of this guarantee, he paid the money. The question arose whether
he could, in an action for the partition of the estate, recover the
amount he lost on account of his agreement to pay double the value of
the slave? Let us see, in the first place, whether he should have given
security for double the amount? And it seems to me that he should not
have done so; for those only are required to give security for double
the amount who make sales voluntarily; but where the party who makes the
sale is performing a duty, he ought not to be compelled to promise any
more than where the one who makes a sale was appointed by the Prætor to
execute a judgment; and even then the party is not in such a condition
that he can be compelled to do what those who sell at their own will are
forced to do; for there is a great deal of difference between him who
discharges a duty and him who sells voluntarily. Hence in the first
place the party was not obliged to make a stipulation for double the
value, but the Prætor should hold that the purchaser has a right of
action on the sale against the actual heir, if the property sold should
be recovered by reason of a superior title.

If, however, the heir made a mistake and furnished the bond, and the
slave acquired his freedom, suit may be brought on the stipulation; and
if this should be done, it is only just that a prætorian action should
be granted against the co-heir, (as the action for the partition of an
estate will not lie) so as to prevent him from sustaining the loss. And,
indeed, for anyone to be able to bring the action for the partition of
an estate, he must not only be an heir, but he must also sue or be sued
because of some act which he performed, or failed to perform, after he
became an heir; otherwise the action for the partition of an estate will
not lie. Hence, if anyone should perform any act with reference to the
estate before he knew that he was an heir, there will be no ground for

an action in partition, because the party is not held to have acted with
the intention of an heir; and therefore where anyone performs an act
before the estate has been entered upon, for instance, if he buried the
testator, he will not be entitled to an action for partition, but if he
did this after the estate was entered upon, we hold, in consequence,
that he can recover by an action in partition the expenses which he
incurred through the funeral.

.50. *The Same, Opinions, Book VI.*

Justice does not permit anything which a father furnished his
emancipated son, who was absent for the purpose of pursuing his studies,
to be included in the share of the property of the deceased which passed
to the said son; where it is proved that the father furnished said
property not as a loan, but because he was induced to do so by paternal
affection.

\51. *Julianus, Digest, Book VIII.*

Where land is delivered to a father-in-law as dowry, and the said
father-in-law appoints his son-in-law an heir to any portion of his
estate, the land should be reserved before division, in compliance with
the award of an arbiter in an action for partition; so that the
condition of the son will be the same as it would have been if the dowry
had been bequeathed in order to be retained. Wherefore, any profits
acquired after issue has been joined must be delivered to him, after an
account of the expenses has been taken; but such as have been acquired
before issue was joined, belong equally to all the heirs. An account
must also be taken of the expenses in this case also, because no
instance can occur which will prevent this deduction.

\(1) If I wish to bring an action for an estate against you, and you
wish to bring one for the partition of the estate against me, the
desires of both of us should be gratified where proper cause is shown;
or if I am in possession of the entire estate and acknowledge that you
are the heir to one half of the same, but I wish to relinquish the joint
ownership, I should obtain an action for the partition of the estate,
because the latter cannot be divided among us in any other way.

Moreover, if you have good ground for bringing a suit for the estate
rather than one in partition, then you must be permitted to bring a suit
for the estate, since some matters are included in an action of this
kind which are not included in one in partition; for instance, if I am
indebted to the estate you will not recover what I owed to the deceased
by an action in partition, but you will do so by an action for the
estate.

\52. *The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book II.*

Mævius, who appointed us heirs, held property in common with Attius, and
if we should bring suit in partition against Attius, and the property
was adjudged to us, Proculus says it will be included in an action for
partition of the estate.

\(1) Where a slave is left his freedom and appointed heir, he can be
compelled by an action for the partition of the estate to pay to the co-

heir anything which he retains in his hands arising from the accounts
that he kept for the testator.

\(2) An arbiter whom you and I selected in an action in partition
desired to award certain property to me and some other to you, and held
that, with reference to these matters, each of us should be directed to
make payment to the other; and the question arose whether he could not
set off one account against the other, and direct the party who owed the
larger account to pay only the excess? It was decided that the arbiter
could do this.

\(3) Where an action is brought for the partition of an estate or for
the division of property held in common, the entire property must be
appraised, and not the shares in the different things.

\53. *Ulpianus, Opinions, Book II.*

Where an emancipated son lent a sum of money to be paid to his father,
it will afterwards be included in the estate of the father only in case
the latter had a right of action against his son for the said sum of
money.

\54. *Neratius, Parchments, Book III.*

You and I were both joint heirs to the estate of Lucius Titius, and I
sold my share of a tract of land belonging to the estate, and then an
action for the partition of the estate was brought between us. In this
instance, the share which was mine will not be included in the case,
since when it was sold it was no longer a part of the estate; nor will
your share be taken into consideration, because even if it remains in
its former legal condition and belongs to the estate; still, by the sale
of my share the ownership of it ceased to be common. Whether one heir
does not sell his share or several do not do so, is of no importance;
provided a certain portion which has been alienated by one of the heirs
and has ceased to form part of the estate.

\55. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book II.*

Where an action for the partition of an estate, or for the division of
property held in common is brought, and it seems almost impossible to
make the division; the judge can render a decision in favor of one
party, and adjudge the entire property to him.

\56. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

Profits which have been due for some time are also included not only in
an action for the establishment of boundaries, but also in one for the
partition of an estate.

\57. *Papinianus, Opinions, Book II.*

Even after an arbiter has been accepted, brothers who divide the common
estate by consent perform the duties demanded by natural affection, and
the division should not be revoked; even though the arbiter did not
render a decision after the controversy was ended, unless relief should
be granted on account of want of age.

TITLE III.

CONCERNING ACTIONS FOR THE PARTITION OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON.

\1. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

The action for the partition of property held in common is necessary
because the action on partnership has reference rather to the personal
transfers from one side to the other than to the division of common
property. In short, an action for the partition of common property will
not lie where the property is not held in common.

\2. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

It makes no difference, however, whether property is held in common
among different persons with partnership or without it; for in either
instance an action for the partition of common property will lie.

Common property exists with partnership where, for instance, parties
jointly purchased the same thing; and it is common without partnership
where, for example, the same property is bequeathed to them by will.

\(1) With reference to the three double actions, namely; that for
partition of an estate, that for the division of common property, and
that for the establishment of boundaries, the question arises who is to
be considered the plaintiff, because the position of all of them appears
to be the same? The better opinion is, however, that he must be
considered the plaintiff who instituted the proceedings in court.

\3. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

In an action for the partition of common property nothing is to be
considered except the division of the property itself which is held in
common; and where any damage is caused to, or committed against any of
said property, or where loss is sustained by any of the joint-owners, or
where anything derived from the common property came into his
possession.

\(1) Where the parties themselves have entered into an agreement with
one another without fraud, the judge must cause it to be upheld in the
first place in an action for the partition of an estate or in one for
the division of common property.

\4. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

By means of this action a division is made of corporeal property of
which we have ownership, but not of an estate.

\(1) The question arises whether an action can be brought for the
partition of common property in a well, and Mela says it can only be
done where the soil in which it is dug is subject to joint ownership.

\(2) This action is a *bona fide* one,^1^ and therefore if anything
remains undivided, the division of all the rest will be valid, and an
action in partition can be brought with reference to whatever is still
undivided.

^1^ *Actiones bonæ fidei* were equitable actions as distinguished from
those *stricti juris*, in which the court was obliged to adhere to the
strict letter of the law. In

\(3) Since the division of the property itself may be the subject of an
action for the partition of common property, so, also, payments due and
expenses which have been incurred may be recovered in this way, and
therefore if anyone incurs expenses he can recover them; but where he
does not bring an action against the other joint owner, but against the
heir of the latter, Labeo very properly thinks that the expenses as well
as the profits collected by the deceased may be included in the action.
It is evident that the profits collected before the property became
subject to joint ownership, or any expenses incurred before that time
should not be included in a suit for the partition of common property.

\(4) Julianus says with reference to this, that if we apply for an order
of court for possession to prevent threatened injury; and, before we are
ordered to take possession, I prop up the building, I cannot recover the
expense of this by an action for the partition of common property.

\5. *Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book II.*

But where the case was not defended, and we are ordered by the Prætor to
take possession of the house, and by reason of this we have obtained the
ownership of the same; it is the opinion of Proculus that I can, by an
action for the partition of common property, recover a portion of the
expense that I have incurred.

\6. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIX.*

Where anyone believing that he owns land in common with Titius, gathers
the crops or incurs expense, when, in fact, he owns said land jointly
with another party; he can bring a prætorian action for the partition of
said property.

\(1) Wherefore, if Titius should sell his share in the land, even though
in this instance there would be no ground for an action for the
partition of common property, because the joint ownership has ceased to
exist; there will still be ground for a prætorian action, which is
granted with reference to payments when the property ceased to be held
in common.

them the moral aspects of the transaction out of which the controversy
had arisen were to be carefully considered, and a large measure of
discretion was permitted the judge in rendering his decree. The good
faith of one or both of the parties was the essential element upon which
the enforcement of the contracts which were usually the subject of these
actions depended; and where fraud or deceit was established, the court
was authorized to assess such damages as he might conclude were demanded
by the principles of fair and honorable dealing between respectable
citizens. The obligations coming within the scope of the *actio bonæ
fidei* like those subject to arbitration, were innumerable, and embraced
almost every business transaction in which men could engage with one
another. Those, however, which were ordinarily the subject of litigation
in proceedings of this kind were sale, partnership, lease, guardianship,
agency, and deposit. The value of the property in question was estimated
at the time of the judgment, and in this respect presented a marked
difference from the appraisement in the *actio stricti juris*, which was
made on the day of the joinder of issue.

The distinction between the *actio bonæ fidei* and the *actio stricti
juris* was not of universal application, but was limited to
controversies having their origin in express or implied contracts.  ED.

\(2) Where, however, one joint-owner acquires any profit out of the
common property either by leasing the same or by cultivating it, he will
be liable to an action in partition; and if he did this in behalf of all
the owners, he should either acquire the profit or sustain the loss; but
if he did not act in their behalf but obtained the profit as an
individual, there is much more reason that he should also be responsible
for the loss. The reason why he must be held accountable for the profit
in an action for the partition of common property is, because it is
considered that he could not readily lease his own share.

There will, however, be no ground for an action for the partition of
common property, unless (as Papinianus says) the party only performed
such acts as were absolutely necessary for properly administering his
own share; but if he could have done otherwise, he has a right of action
on the ground of business transacted, and is liable to the same action.

\(3) Where any expenses are incurred after issue has been joined in an
action for the partition of common property; Nerva properly holds that
these are also included.

\(4) Sabinus and Atilicinus are of the opinion that the offspring of a
female slave is also included.

\(5) The same writers think that this action likewise includes
accessions and diminutions.

\(6) Where a party inters a corpse in a burial-place held in common, it
should be considered whether he renders said burial-place religious? In
fact, each owner has an individual right of interment in a burial-place,
but either of them alone cannot make a place that is free religious.
Trebatius and Labeo, although they think that the place is not rendered
religious, still hold that an action *in factum* can be brought.

\(7) If you give security for the entire amount with reference to the
prevention of threatened injury to a house, Labeo says that you will not
be entitled to an action for the partition of common property, since you
were not obliged to give security for the entire amount, but it was
sufficient to have given it for your share; which opinion is correct.

\(8) Where you and I have a tract of land in common but my share has
been given in pledge, it will be included in action for the partition of
common property, but the right of the creditor to what has been pledged
will remain unimpaired, even though it should be made the subject of
adjudication by the Court; for the security will remain unimpaired even
if one joint-owner had conveyed his share to the other.

Julianus says that the arbiter, in an action for the partition of common
property, must appraise the share at so much less, because the creditor
can sell that part of the property under the agreement.

\(9) Julianus also says that if anyone with whom I own a slave in common
pledges his share to me, and then begins an action for the partition of
common property, he can be barred by an exception on the ground of
pledge; but if I do not make use of this exception, it will be the duty
of the Court after adjudging the entire slave to the debtor, to compel
him to pay me the appraised amount of my share; since my

right to the pledge remains unimpaired. If, however, the Court should
adjudge the slave to me, then he can only compel me to pay whatever the
pledge is worth over and above the money which was lent, and shall order
that the debtor be released from liability to me.

\(10) It is within the province of the judge to render such a decision
that the land may be vested in one party, and an usufruct in the same in
another.

\(11) The other matters relating to this subject are the same that we
have discussed with reference to the action for the partition of an
estate.

\(12) Urseius states that where a neighbor has given notice that no new
work shall be performed on a building held in common, and one of the
joint owners, on account of this, has judgment rendered against him, he
can recover damages from his joint owner in proportion to his share; but
Julianus very properly notes that this is true only where it was
advantageous to the house that it should be done.

\7. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XX.*

There is ground for an action for the partition of land held in common
where it is subject to a perpetual lease. It should be considered
whether land under a perpetual lease can be divided into separate
tracts; but, as a general rule, the judge ought to avoid making a
division of this kind, otherwise the perpetual rent will become
confused.

\(1) Neratius says that where an arbiter, dividing an estate not subject
to a perpetual lease into two parts, awards them to two persons, he can
impose a servitude, just as if they were two separate tracts of land.

\(2) Where parties have the right to bring the Publician Action *in
rem*, they can also bring an action for the partition of common
property.

\(3) An action for the recovery of property by the owner of the same
does not lie under certain circumstances; still, if there is just cause
for retaining possession, an equitable action for the partition of
common property can be brought; for instance, where property is held in
possession on account of the payment of a debt which in reality is not
due.

\(4) There is no ground for this action among depredators, nor is there
any where parties hold possession by sufferance or by stealth; for the
reason that this possession is unjust, and while possession by
sufferance is, in fact, lawful, it does not justify judicial
proceedings.

\(5) Julianus states that if one possessor makes a demand for partition,
and the other alleges that he holds possession by force, this action
should not be granted, not even after a year has elapsed; because it is
settled that, even after a year, an interdict will be granted against
the one who forcibly ejected the other. He also says that where the
party who instituted proceedings is said to be in possession by
sufferance, this action will not lie, because an interdict is also
granted in an instance of this kind. Moreover, if the plaintiff is said
to hold possession by stealth, it must be held that this action will not
lie; for,

he adds, an interdict can likewise be obtained in a case of possession
by stealth.

\(6) Where there are two persons who have received property in pledge,
it is perfectly just that they should be granted an equitable action for
partition.

\(7) Moreover, if a controversy arises between two parties with
reference to an usufruct, this action should be granted.

\(8) Again, if two parties are placed in possession by order of the
Prætor for the preservation of legacies, there is good ground for
possession on account of the custody; and hence, where there are two
unborn children, the same rule will apply, and this is reasonable.

\(9) It is evident that where anyone who was placed in possession for
the prevention of threatened injury has already been ordered to take
possession, he would not be entitled to an equitable action for his own
benefit, as he has a right to bring an action for recovery.

\(10) Where an action for the division of a common usufruct is brought,
the judge must discharge his duty either so as to permit each one to
enjoy the usufruct in different parts, or he can lease the usufruct to
one of them, or to a third person; so that in this way they may collect
the rents without any further disagreement; or if the property is
movable, he can contrive to make the parties agree among themselves, and
give security to one another for use and enjoyment for a certain time,
that is to say that the usufruct shall belong to them alternately, each
one having for it a special term.

\(11) Neither tenants, nor persons who have received property on deposit
are entitled to this action, although they may hold possession in
accordance with natural law.

\(12) Where parties have accepted a pledge in common, a division should
be made between them in such a way that a share shall not be appraised
at its true value, but only at so much as the indebtedness on that
particular share amounts to; and the pledge should be assigned to one of
the creditors, but permission shall not be refused to the debtor to
tender the amount which he owes and redeem his pledge. The same rule
applies where the possessor of a pledge brings an action *in rem* for
redemption, and the party in possession tenders him the amount assessed
by the Court.

\(13) Where a debtor has pledged his share of a tract of land owned in
common, and his creditor is sued by the owner of the other share, or by
another creditor of another debtor, and he makes a higher bid for the
property in question, and the debtor of the party to whom the property
was adjudged wishes to recover his share of the land after paying what
he himself owed; it is very properly held that he should not be heard,
unless he is prepared to also recover what his creditor purchased under
the adjudication. For, if you should sell a share of the property, and,
before you have delivered it to the purchaser, an action for partition
is brought against you, and the other share also should be adjudged to
you; it is stated in consequence that no action can be brought on the
ground of purchase, unless the plaintiff was prepared to take the entire
property, because this share accrues to the vendor through

another; and the purchaser can also be sued on account of the sale to
compel him to take all of it; and the only question to be considered is
whether any fraud was committed by the vendor. Where, however, one share
has been disposed of, and the vendor is defeated in the bidding, he will
be liable in an action on purchase to refund the price. The same rule is
observed in mandate and other cases of this kind.

\8. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

Even though the entire number of parties who own property in common do
not desire partition but only some of them, this action can be brought
among them.

\(1) If it is uncertain whether the *Lex Falcidia* is available, an
action for partition can be brought between the legatee and the heir, or
proceedings for recovery may be instituted, for a share the value of
which is not ascertained. This likewise takes place where a *peculium*
is bequeathed, because it is uncertain to what extent an indebtedness to
the owner diminishes the *peculium.*

\(2) The action for the partition of common property also includes the
case where anyone depreciates the value of said property; for instance,
by wounding a slave, or by corrupting his morals, or by cutting down
trees on the land.

\(3) Where a joint-owner pays on behalf of a slave more by way of
reparation for damage than he should have done, the slave shall be
appraised and he can recover his share.

\(4) Moreover, where one joint-owner is sued in an action *De peculio
*for the entire amount of the obligation and judgment is rendered
against him, he will *be* entitled to an action in partition to enable
him to recover a part of the *peculium.*

\9. *Africanus, Questions, Book VII.*

But where one joint-owner, on account of a slave held in common, has
judgment rendered against him in an action *De peculio* for the entire
amount of the indebtedness, and the property belonging to said *peculium
*is lost while in his hands; still, an equitable action in partition for
a recovery of a portion of the money will lie; for otherwise it would be
unjust if the whole matter should cause loss to be incurred by the party
who defended the action; since there ought to be an equal risk imposed
upon both owners with reference to property included in *peculium.* For
where anyone undertakes the defence of a slave at the request of his
owner, he will be repaid everything which he expended in good faith,
even though the *peculium *should subsequently be lost. This is the case
where no negligence has been committed by either party; since if an
action *De peculio* is brought against the owner, and he is prepared to
surrender to the plaintiff the property included in the *peculium*, it
is held he should be heard if proper cause be shown, of course, if he
did this without malicious or fraudulent intent.

\10. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXIII.*

Again, although the action under the *Lex Aquilia* cannot be brought
against an heir; still, in this action the heir must pay the joint-owner

for any damage which the deceased caused to the common property on
account of which any right of action arises under the *Lex Aquilia.*

\(1) Where we have only a right of use which can neither be sold nor
leased, let us consider how a division can be made in an action for the
partition of common property. If, however, the Prætor should interpose
and arrange matters in such a way that the Court may adjudge the use to
one of the parties; it will not be held that the other, who accepts
compensation, is not making use of the property, on the ground that he
who appears to enjoy it is doing more than the other; because this
results from the necessity of the case.

\(2) In an action brought for the partition of common property the judge
should appraise such property at its true value, and security should
also be furnished against recovery by eviction.

\11. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.*

We should, by all means, bear in mind that if, after the destruction of
the common property, he who is entitled to be paid something by reason
of the common ownership desires to bring an action on this ground, he
will be granted an equitable action in partition; for instance, where
the plaintiff incurred certain expenses on the common property, or the
joint-owner alone obtained some profit from it  as, for example, the
labor of a slave, or money paid for the same  an account of all these
things is taken in an action of this kind.

\12. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXI.*

Where a house or a wall is held in common, and it becomes necessary to
rebuild it, or demolish it, or insert something into it; an action can
be brought for the partition of common property, or we may institute
proceedings under the Edict *Uti possidetis.*

\13. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXV.*

Everything is included in an action for the partition of common
property, unless something has been expressly excepted by common
agreement to avoid its being included.

\14. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book III.*

This action includes whatever has been done, or ought to have been done
for the common benefit by a party who knew that he had a fellow-owner.

\(1) Any expenses, however, which I incurred while I believed that the
land was my own, and which, if suit is brought for the recovery of a
part of the land I can, of course, retain by pleading the exception on
the ground of fraud; it should be considered whether I can retain them
on account of the justice of the action itself, if suit in partition
should be brought against me. I think the better opinion is that I can
do so, because the action for the partition of common property is a
*bona fide* one, but this is only the case where suit is brought against
me; still, if I should dispose of my share, nothing will remain from
which I can retain the expenses.

Let us consider if a purchaser from me can retain them, for if an action
is brought to recover a share from him, can he retain the amount on the
ground of the expense which I incurred, just as I myself could do? The
better opinion is that, in this instance, the expenses can be retained,
and since this is the case, it is most justly held that I should be
granted an equitable action against my co-owner on account of said
expenses, even though the joint ownership still continues to exist.

The rule is different, however, where I spend money upon my own
property, as it were, which really belongs to another, or is held in
common; for, in this instance, I have only the right of retention
because I do not wish to bind anyone to myself; where I think property
belongs to Titius which in fact belongs to Mævius, or that it is owned
by me in common with another party who in reality is not my co-owner, I
do this to bind another party to me; and as an action on the ground of
business transacted is granted me against someone whose affairs I have
attended to thinking that they were those of another, so also in the
instance under consideration. Therefore, if I were to sell the land to
another, for the reason that the case was such that I should be entitled
to an action, one on the ground of business transacted should be granted
me (as Julianus also says).

\(2) If it should be agreed that no partition whatever shall be made, it
is perfectly evident that an agreement of this kind would have no force;
but if it was agreed that none should be made within a certain time, and
this enures to the benefit of the property itself, such an agreement
will be valid.

\(3) Where it is agreed between joint-owners that the community of
ownership shall not be divided within a certain time, there is no doubt
that a party who is bound by an agreement of this kind is at liberty to
sell; and therefore a purchaser from anyone who brings an action for the
division of common property will be barred by the same exception by
which the vendor himself would have been barred.

\(4) If a joint-owner makes an agreement not to bring suit for his
share, the joint ownership is, to all intents and purposes, terminated.

\15. *The Same, On Plautius, Book V.*

Where a joint-owner is sued with reference to a slave held in common,
and judgment is rendered against him, he can bring a suit for partition
even before he complies with the judgment; for, if a noxal action is
brought against one he can immediately bring suit against his co-heir
for the delivery of his share to him, giving security at the same time
that, if he does not deliver the slave, he will return the share.

\16. *The Same, On Plautius, Book VI.*

Where joint-owners dissolve their ownership, it is customary for
security to be furnished with reference to any indebtedness which may
exist, which is dependent upon a condition.

\17. *Modestinus, Rules, Book IX.*

Where one of a number of joint-heirs purchases from a creditor a tract
of land which had been given in pledge by the testator, he should

not be sued by his co-heirs in an action for the partition of common
property.

\18. *Javolenus, Epistles, Book II.*

An arbiter cannot decide that land belonging to an estate shall be
subject to a servitude attaching to land which is not a part of said
estate; for the reason that the authority of a judge cannot extend
beyond what is before the court.^1^

\19. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

A tree which grows up on a boundary line and also a stone which extends
over two tracts, so long as they are attached to the soil belong to both
owners, according to the position they occupy over the land of each; and
they will not be included in an action for the partition of common
property. But as soon as the stone is removed, or the tree uprooted or
cut down, it becomes common and undivided property, and will be included
in action for the partition of such property; for what was formerly in
separate parts is now merged. Wherefore, where two masses of any
substance belonging to two owners are mixed together, the entire mass is
common property, even though some portion of the substance, as it was in
the first place, exists separately; and so, also, where a tree or a
stone are separated from the soil, the rights of ownership are merged.

\(1) An arbiter for the purpose of dividing common property should not
be appointed with reference to a vestibule, which is common to two
houses, where either of the parties are unwilling; because where anyone
is compelled to bid for such a vestibule, he necessarily will sometimes
be obliged to pay the value of the entire house, if it has no

other entrance.

\(2) Where a right of way through the same place belongs to two of us,
and one has incurred some expense with reference to it; Pomponius says
rather harshly that either an action for partition or one on partnership
will lie; for how can joint ownership be understood to exist in
something which the parties use separately? A suit should be brought on
the ground of business transacted.

\(3) The judge who presides in an action for the partition of common
property as well as in one for the partition of an estate, where a slave
has taken to flight, must direct the parties who are before him to bid,
and should then adjudge the slave to him who bids the highest; and there
will be no danger that the penalty prescribed by the *Lex Fabia* will be
incurred on account of the decree of the Senate.

\(4) A watercourse is said by Labeo not to be included in an action for
the partition of common property; for it is either a part of the land 
and hence should not be considered in the trial  or it is separated
from the land but is divided either with reference to the quantity or
the time when it is to be used. Sometimes, however, rights may be
separated from the land and still not be divided either by quantity or
by periods of use; as, for instance, where the party to whom they be-

^1^ This is probably the first disapproval of an *obiter dictum* on
record.  ED.

longed left several heirs, and, when this happens, it is suitable that
these things also should be included in an action for partition; for
Pomponius says that he does not see why they should not be included in
an action for the partition of common property as well as in that of the
partition of an estate. Therefore, in instances of this kind, they are
also included in an action for the division of common property, just as
the aforesaid rights are divided either by quantity or by periods of
time.

\20. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIII.*

Where a person with whom you hold land in common does not answer in the
case of an offence, and on this account the house is demolished, or the
trees are cut down by order of the judge; damages can be recovered by
you in an action for the partition of common property, for whatever is
lost through the negligence of a joint-owner is included in this
proceeding.

\21. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

It is greatly advantageous to all parties for a judge, in dividing
tracts of land, to follow whatever is most beneficial, or what the
litigants may prefer.

\22. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

If I build a wall for my neighbor and myself with the understanding that
I can recover the expense of the same from him in proportion to his
share; or if I build the wall by way of donation, it will be common
property.

\23. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

Where an agreement is made between you and your co-owner to the effect
that you can take the crops in alternate years, and your co-owner does
not permit you to gather them during your year; it should be considered
whether an action based on the contract of leasing or one for the
partition of common property will lie. The same question arises where a
joint-owner who agreed that he should enjoy the crop every second year
turns in cattle, and causes the crop for the next year, which his
co-heir had a right to gather, to be ruined?

I think that the better opinion is that an action for the partition of
common property should be brought, rather than one on the contract of
leasing (for how can a lease exist when there is no rent involved?) or a
civil action should certainly be granted for uncertain damages.

\24. *Julianus, Digest, Book VIII.*

Where a slave held in common acquires anything through the property of
one of his owners, it will, nevertheless, be subject to joint ownership;
but the party through whose property the acquisition was made can
collect the amount by an action in partition, because it is in
conformity with good faith that every one should have a prior lien on
anything which a slave acquires by means of his property.

\(1) If I intend to bring an action against you for the partition of
common property, and you transfer your share to Titius for the purpose
of changing the conditions of the trial; you will be liable to me in a
prætorian action, because you acted in such a way as to avoid an action
in partition being brought against you.

\25. *The Same, Digest, Book XII.*

Where Stichus, a slave owned by you and me in common, has himself a
sub-slave named Pamphilus, who is worth ten *aurei*, and an action *De
peculio* is brought against me, and, having lost it, I pay ten *aurei;
*then, even though Pamphilus should die afterwards, you will,
nevertheless, be compelled to pay me five *aurei* in an action in
partition or in one on partnership, because I have released you from a
debt of that amount. Much more ought I to be entitled to recover this
amount, if Stichus, after the death of Pamphilus, should acquire another
sub-slave.

\26. *Alfenus Verus, Digest, Book II.*

A slave owned in common, while in the hands of one of his owners, broke
his leg while working; and the question arose what kind of an action the
other owner could bring against him with whom the slave had been at the
time? I answered that if the common property had been injured rather
through negligence than through accident, he could recover whatever
damages were assessed by an arbiter in an action for the partition of
common property.

\27. *Paulus, Epitomes of the Digest of Alfenus, Book III.*

A single joint-owner cannot legally put a slave owned in common to
torture, except with respect to some matter in which all the parties
were interested.

\28. *Papinianus, Questions, Book VII.*

Sabinus says that no joint-owner can legally perform any act with
reference to common property without the consent of the other, hence it
is manifest that the right of prevention exists; and where parties are
in the same position, it is established that he who objects has the
advantage. But, although where property is in common, one joint-owner
may be prevented from proceeding where a building is in course of
erection, he cannot be compelled to remove it if the other failed to
prevent him from constructing it when he could have done so; and,
therefore, compensation for the damage can only be obtained by means of
an action for the partition of common property. Where, however, he
consented to the erection of the building, he will not be entitled to an
action for damages; but if one party did something during the absence of
his co-heir to the injury of the latter, he can then be forced to remove
it.

\29. *Paulus, Questions, Book II.*

Where anyone holds land in common with Titius, and, believing that he
held it in common with Mævius, expends money thereon; it is very

properly held that an action for the partition of common property will
be sufficient for him; for this is the case if I know that the property
is common but do not know who my co-heir is, as I am not transacting the
business of my co-heir, but am managing my own property; and the action
arises rather with reference to the property on which the money was
expended, than on the person of the joint owner. In short, we hold that
this action is the one under which a ward would be liable, in an
application to the court to compel him to reimburse expenses.

The case is different where a man thinks that he is spending money on
his own property, while in fact it is held in common; and in this
instance he will neither be entitled to an action in partition, nor will
an equitable action be granted him; for anyone who knows that property
is owned in common or belongs to another transacts his business with a
view to render him liable to himself, even though he may be mistaken
with reference to the person.

\(1) Pomponius says that anyone of a number of joint-owners can demand a
judge; but where anyone of the said joint-owners remains silent, an
action for the division of common property may properly be brought
against him.

\30. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

An action for the partition of common property may be properly brought
either where neither party is in possession, or where one of the
joint-owners is not in possession of the land.

\31. *Paulus, Opinions, Book XV.*

Where two slaves were reserved out of an estate by the order of the
Prætor for the purpose of serving certain minors, it was held that they
were not divided, but remained the common property of all.

TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR PRODUCTION.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIV.*

This action is very necessary, it is employed every day; and it was
introduced principally on account of suits for the recovery of property.

\2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXI.*

To "produce" is to place property publicly in the power of another, so
that he who brings a suit may have an opportunity for trying it,

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIV.*

In this proceeding the plaintiff ought to know everything, and to state
all the facts relating to the property which is the subject of the
action.

\(1) A party litigant who institutes proceedings for the production of
property does not, in fact, state that he is the owner, nor is he

obliged to prove this, as there are many causes for bringing an action
of this kind.^1^

\(2) Moreover, it should be noted in this action that where the
defendant is contumacious, judgment based on the oath of the plaintiff
may be rendered against him, the amount to be decided by the judge.

\(3) This action is a personal one, and he is entitled to it who is
about to bring a suit *in rem*, no matter what kind of a suit it may be,
whether the Servian Action on a pledge, or an hypothecary action, both
of which can be brought by creditors.

\(4) Pomponius says, however, that where a man is about to bring suit
for an usufruct he is entitled to an action for production.

\(5) Moreover, where anyone who is about to apply for an interdict asks
that the property be produced, he shall be heard.

\(6) Moreover, if I desire to select a slave or any other property, the
right to choose which has been bequeathed to me; it is established that
I can bring an action for production, and when the property is produced,
that I can bring suit for recovery of the same.

\(7) Where anyone wishes to institute proceedings by means of a noxal
action, an action for the production of the property is necessary; for,
in fact, where the owner of the slave is ready to make a defence, and
the plaintiff cannot designate the slave unless he is present, either
because he does not recollect him, or does not have his name; is it not
just that the entire body of slaves should be produced before him, in
order that he may pick out the one who committed the offence? Therefore,
this should be done, where proper cause is shown, in order that the
party with reference to whom the action is brought may be designated
after a survey of the slaves is taken.

\(8) Where anyone besides the heir wishes the will, or the codicils, or
anything else relating to the will to be produced, it should be held
that this cannot be done by means of this action, since the interdicts
relating to such matters will be sufficient for the party; and this was
the opinion of Pomponius.

\(9) It must be remembered, however, that not only those persons whom we
have mentioned are entitled to the action for production, but also
anyone who has an interest in having the production made; hence

^1^ The *Actio ad exhibendum* was an equitable or prætorian proceeding
for the production of property alleged by the plaintiff to be in
possession, or under the control of the defendant, and which the former
declared he was entitled to examine in order to establish its identity,
usually for the purpose of bringing an action for its recovery. It also
applied to the production of instruments upon which the title of the
plaintiff depended, and in order to compel his adversary to produce the
article or document in question, he must first prove that his interest
or ownership in it was of such a character as to justify the
intervention of the prætor. It was therefore, as a rule, a preliminary
proceeding, and was available by persons enjoying only qualified rights,
such as the holders of pledges, legatees and usufructuaries. Further
legal action might not be required where there was no actual dispute as
to title, and the matter could be permanently disposed of when brought
before the prætorian tribunal. As the application was for the benefit of
the plaintiff, it was understood that he would be liable for all the
costs arising from it.

The modern equitable bill of discovery, in some respects, bears a
considerable resemblance to the Roman *Actio ad exhibendum.*  ED.

the judge ought to determine in the first place whether the party has an
interest, and not whether he is the owner of the property in question;
and he should then order it to be produced, or refuse to do so because
the party has no interest in the matter.

\(10) Julianus further states that if I have no right of action for
recovery, I can still institute proceedings for production, because it
is to my interest that this should be done; as, for instance, where a
slave is left to me that Titius may choose, for I can bring an action
for production, since I have an interest in its being done in order that
Titius may make his selection; and I then have an action for recovery,
even though I have no right to select a slave that may be produced.

\(11) Where an action for the production of property is brought against
me, I cannot bring one for the same purpose merely because I have been
sued in the said action; even though it may be held that I am
interested, as I am liable for the restoration of the slave. This,
however, is not sufficient, for, otherwise, where anyone had managed to
fraudulently relinquish possession, he could bring an action for
production, even when he did not intend to bring one for recovery, or to
proceed by means of an interdict; and either a thief or a robber could
do this; which is by no means true. Therefore Neratius very properly
states that the judge, in an application for production, must
investigate carefully whether the party has a just and probable cause of
action by reason of which he desires the property to be produced.

\(12) Pomponius states that several parties may legally bring an action
for the production of the identical slave; for instance, where a slave
belongs to the first one, the usufruct of the same to the second, and
the third contends that he has possession of him, and the fourth alleges
that he was pledged to him; hence, all of them are entitled to an action
for his production, because all of them have an interest in having the
said slave produced.

\(13) The same author adds that the judge, by reason of the authority
vested in him on account of this action, can also examine any exceptions
which the possessor may interpose, and if any of them shows clearly that
the plaintiff is barred, then he who is in possession should be
discharged; but if the exception should be obscure, or a more important
matter be involved, this should be deferred until the trial takes place,
and the property should be ordered to be produced.

There are certain exceptions, however, which the judge who is to preside
in the action for production should by all means himself determine; for
instance, those based upon an informal agreement, on malicious fraud, on
an oath, or on a judgment formerly rendered.

\(14) Justice sometimes demands the production of the property so that,
although an action for this purpose cannot be brought, an action *in
factum *may be granted; a matter which Julianus refers to. He says a
slave who belonged to my wife kept my accounts, you are in possession of
said accounts, and I desire them to be produced. He says further if the
said accounts are written upon my paper, there is ground for this
action, because I can bring suit for said accounts, since if the paper
is mine what is written thereon is mine also; but if the paper is

not mine, as I cannot bring suit to recover it, I cannot institute
proceedings for its production; hence an action *in factum* will lie in
my favor.

\(15) It must be remembered that by this action proceedings can be
instituted against the possessor, and not only against him who has civil
possession, but also against him who has possession naturally. Finally,
it is established that a creditor who has received property in pledge
can be compelled to produce the same:

\4. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.*

For the action can be brought against a party with whom property has
been deposited, to whom it has been loaned, or by whom it has been
rented.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIV.*

Celsus states that if anyone who agreed to remove merchandise places it
in a warehouse, an action for production based on his contract can be
brought against him; and, moreover, if the party making the agreement
dies and leaves an heir, the action can be brought against the latter.
Where, however, there is no heir, the action can be brought against the
keeper of the warehouse; for, if the property is not in the possession
of anyone, he says it is evident that either the keeper of the warehouse
has it in his possession, or, at all events, it is certain that he can
produce it. He also asks, "How can a party be in possession of property
who agreed to remove it? Is this because he had a lien on it?" This
example shows that even those persons who have the power to produce
property are liable to an action for its production.

\(1) Julianus, however, says that in accordance with this rule a person
is liable to an action for the production who is in possession for the
purpose of preserving property or legacies, as well as he who holds
property by reason of an usufruct, even though, in this instance, he by
no means has possession of it. Hence Julianus asks to what extent shall
such parties produce said property? He answered that the former must do
so to enable the plaintiff to have possession, but the party against
whom the suit was brought must be in possession in order to preserve the
property; and that he who has the usufruct must do so in order that the
plaintiff may possess the property, but that he against whom the action
is brought may use and enjoy the same.

\(2) Moreover, Julianus says that a purchaser who does not return
partially used materials, can be compelled to produce them; the damages
being estimated according to the amount that I am willing to swear to;
but he adds in the same place: "If the purchaser has possession, or has
committed fraud in order to avoid having possession."

\(3) Celsus also says that if you have piled manure upon my unoccupied
land, you can, by an action for production, obtain permission to remove
it, on condition, however, that you remove the whole of it, otherwise
you cannot do this.

\(4) Moreover, if a boat should be carried by the force of a river upon
the field of another party, Neratius holds that the latter can be

sued for production. Wherefore, he asks whether the plaintiff must give
security to the owner of the land merely with reference to future
damage, or for past damage also; and he replies that it must also be
given for the damage already committed.

\(5) Where, however, if anything from a fallen building is thrown upon
your land, or upon your house, you can be compelled to produce it, even
though it may not be in your possession.

\(6) Again, where anyone has not the power to deliver anything, even
though he has possession of it, he will not be liable to an action for
its production; as for instance, where a slave is a fugitive it is
evident that the party will only be liable to give security to produce
said slave if at any time he should come into his power. But where he
has not taken to flight, but you permit him to live where he wishes, the
same rule applies; or if you have sent him on a journey, or you employ
him upon your land, you will only be compelled to furnish security.

\6. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XIV.*

A jewel which is set in gold belonging to another, or any ornamentation
attached to a candlestick belonging to another party cannot be demanded
in an action for recovery, but an action can be brought for production
in order to have it detached.

The rule is different where material is used in a house, as, in this
instance, even an action for production will not lie, because the Law of
the Twelve Tables forbids the material from being separated; but an
action on the ground of material used can be brought for double its
value under the same law.

\7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIV.*

By the term *tignum* we understand in the Law of the Twelve Tables every
description of material; as is very properly held by certain
authorities.

\(1) If you attach my wheel to a vehicle of yours, you can be compelled
to produce it  and this was stated by Pomponius  although, strictly
speaking, it is not legally in your possession.

\(2) The same rule applies where you attach my plank to your chest or
ship, or my handle to your cup, or my ornaments to your bowl, or use my
purple for your clothing, or join to your statue an arm which is mine.

\(3) Moreover, a municipality can be sued for production because it has
the power of delivery; for it has been settled that it can hold
possession and acquire by usucaption. The same rule must be held to
apply to societies and other corporate bodies.

\(4) Where the party is not in possession at the time issue is joined,
but comes into possession before the decree has been rendered; we think
it should be held that judgment should be pronounced against him unless
he restores the property.

\(5) Where anyone has possession at the time that issue is joined, and
afterwards ceases to have possession without fraudulent intent, he
should be discharged; even though, (as Pomponius says) he is to

blame because he did not at once make restitution, but permitted issue
to be joined against him.

\(6) The same author states that where a party in possession at the time
when issue was joined afterwards ceased to have possession, and then
came into possession again, either by reason of the same title or of
another one; judgment must be rendered against him, unless he delivers
up the property.

\(7) Pomponius not improperly adds that the party who brings suit for
production must have an interest at both times in the property being
delivered to him; that is to say, at the time when issue is joined and
when the decision is rendered. This opinion is also held by Labeo.

\8. *Julianus, Digest, Book IX.*

Where an action for production is brought against the party who was
neither in possession nor was guilty of fraud to avoid having
possession, and after his death his heir has possession of the property,
the latter can be compelled to produce it; for if I bring suit against a
man for a tract of land, and his heir comes into possession of it under
the same title, he can be compelled to surrender it.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIV.*

Julianus says that if anyone should kill a slave who is in his
possession, or should transfer the possession to another, or should
spoil property in such a way that it cannot be held; he will be liable
to an action for production of the same, because he acted fraudulently
to avoid being in possession. Hence, if he spills or destroys wine, oil,
or anything else, he will be liable to this action.

\(1) Acorns from your tree fall upon my land and I turn cattle thereon
to pasture them. To what action am I liable? Pomponius states that an
action for production will lie if I turned the cattle out with
fraudulent design so that they might feed upon the acorns; for even if
the acorns were still there, and I should not permit you to remove them,
I will be liable to an action for production, just as if anyone were not
permitted to remove materials which had been placed upon my land; and we
accept the opinion of Pomponius, whether the acorns are still there, or
they have been consumed. If they are still there, I will be entitled to
an interdict to permit me to gather acorns, so that I may have the power
to gather every third day, if I furnish security against threatened
injury.

\(2) Where anyone has caused property to come into the possession of
another, he is held to have acted fraudulently in order to avoid being
in possession; provided he committed the act with malicious intent.

\(3) Where anyone produces property which is in a worse condition than
it was previously, Sabinus says that he is still liable to an action for
production. This is certainly true where the property was fraudulently
changed into another form; as, for instance, where an ingot of metal is
made out of a cup; for even though he produces the

ingot, he will be liable to the action for production, as the form
having been changed, he almost destroys the substance of the property.

\(4) Marcellus states that if ten *aurei* are bequeathed to you under a
certain condition, and the usufruct of the same to me absolutely, and
then the heir, while the condition is still pending, and without
requiring security, pays the said ten *aurei* to me, the usufructuary;
he will be liable to an action for production, as having acted
fraudulently to avoid being in possession. The fraud consists in his
neglecting to exact security from the usufructuary, and the result was
that your legacy was lost, since you now are not able to bring an action
to recover the money. The action for production, however, could only be
available if the condition on which the legacy depends takes place. You
might, however, have protected yourself by means of a stipulation for
the payment of the legacy, and, if you did so, you will have no need of
the action for production. If, however, the heir, not being aware that a
legacy had been bequeathed to you, did not exact security from the
usufructuary, Marcellus says that an action for production will not lie,
of course because there was no fraud; but the legatee will be entitled
to relief by means of an action *in factum* against the usufructuary.

\(5) To "produce," so far as this section is concerned, is to exhibit
something in the same condition in which it was when issue was joined,
so that the party, having full power to examine the property, can
proceed with the action which he intended to bring without the property
which he claimed being in any respect injured; even though the suit was
brought, not for the purpose of restitution, but for production.

\(6) Hence, if when the party produces the property it has become his by
usucaption after issue has been joined, he cannot be considered to have
produced it at all, because the plaintiff has lost his case, and
therefore the defendant must not be discharged; unless he is ready to
answer the claim as referred back to the original day, so that the
profit may be estimated in accordance with law.

\(7) For the reason that in this action the plaintiff obtains everything
depending upon the property which is the object of the suit, Sabinus
holds that the offspring of a female slave should likewise be delivered,
whether she was pregnant at the time, or conceived subsequently; and
this opinion is also approved by Pomponius.

\(8) In addition to this, any advantages which may have been lost on
account of the property not having been produced, or because it was
produced too** late, should also be considered by the judge; hence
Neratius says that the advantage to the plaintiff, and not the actual
value of the property, should be estimated, and this advantage, he says,
is sometimes of less value than that of the property itself.

\10. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXVI.*

Where a right of choice is granted within a certain time, and the trial
has been protracted so long that the production will be of no avail, the
advantage to which the plaintiff is entitled must be preserved;

but if the heir was not to blame because he did not produce the property
at the time when issue was joined, he should be discharged.

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIV.*

But where an estate is lost on account of a slave not being produced, it
will be perfectly just for the judge, in the assessment of damages, to
take into consideration the injury done to the estate.

\(1) Let us consider where the property must be produced, and at whose
expense this shall be done. Labeo says that it should be produced where
it was at the time when issue was joined, but it must be transported or
led to the place where the proceedings were instituted, at the risk and
expense of the plaintiff. He says that it is evident that the party in
possession of a slave must furnish him with food and clothing, and take
care of him. I hold that sometimes the plaintiff must do this also;
where, for example, a slave was accustomed to support himself either by
manual labor, or by some trade, and is now compelled to be

idle.

In like manner, where the slave who is to be produced is placed in
charge of the Court, the party who desired him to be produced must be
responsible for his food, if his possessor was not accustomed to provide
him with it; for if he had been accustomed to do so, then he can not
refuse to pay for his maintenance. Sometimes the party in possession is
required to produce him at his own expense; as, for instance, where he
has placed property in some secret place so that the production of the
same might be more inconvenient for the plaintiff; for, in this
instance, he must produce the property at his own expense and risk in
the place where the proceedings have been instituted, so that his bad
faith may not benefit him.

\(2) Where anyone is sued with reference to several things, and was in
possession of all of them at the time when issue was joined, even though
he may afterwards have relinquished possession of some of them without
fraudulent intent; judgment must be given against him, unless he
produces all that he can.

\12. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVI.*

There is ground for this action where a party is to be produced whose
freedom anyone wishes to have established.

\(1) A son under paternal authority is liable to this action, if he has
power to produce the property.

\(2) Julianus says that where several actions are brought for production
of the same property, and this is done for the same reason, an exception
can be pleaded. Where, however, a party brings suit for the recovery of
property, and after issue has been joined he receives the property from
another person, a new cause of action is introduced, and therefore he
cannot avail himself of an exception.

Again, where anyone is about to bring suit against a party for theft and
institutes proceedings for production, and the property is stolen a
second time, the same principle will apply. Finally, where a party
institutes proceedings for production in order that a choice may

be made, and after issue has been joined the right to choose is given to
him by the will of some one else, he can bring another action for
production.

\(3) Where anyone makes must out of my grapes, or oil out of my olives,
or clothing out of my wool, being aware that these things belong to
another; he will be liable to an action for production with reference to
both, because what is made out of our property is certainly ours.

\(4) Where a slave dies after issue has been joined, even though this
happens without the malicious fraud or negligence of the possessor;
still, judgment sometimes should be rendered against him to an amount
equal to the benefit which would have accrued to the plaintiff if
nothing should be done by the possessor to prevent the slave from being
produced in court when issue was joined; and so much the more is this
the case if it appears that he died on account of some accident which
would not have happened if he had been produced at the time.

\(5) Where property cannot be produced immediately for some good reason,
the party must furnish security by order of court, that he will produce
it upon a specified day.

\(6) An heir can make use of this proceeding in his own name, but not
while acting as heir. The heir of a possessor is also liable on his own
account. Hence, it is not worth while to ask whether the action can be
granted either to an heir or against one. It is evident that this action
should be granted against an heir where the deceased had been guilty of
fraud, if the estate has become more valuable on this account; for
instance, where the heir obtained the price of the property.

\13. *Gaius, On the Edict of the Urban Prætor; Title, Cases Relating to
Liberty.*

Where a freeman is said to be detained by anyone, an interdict is
available against him who is said to detain him for the purpose of
compelling him to produce him; as an action for his production is held
to be of no force in a case of this kind, because it is considered to
lie only in favor of one who has a pecuniary interest.

\14. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XV.*

Where a husband has received money as a gift from his wife, and, knowing
that it did not become his, paid it out for the purchase of some
article, he acted fraudulently to avoid being in possession, and
therefore is liable to an action for production.

\15. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XVIII.*

Treasure which belongs to me is buried in your land and you will not
permit me to dig it up. So long as you do not remove it from the place
in which it is, Labeo says that I am not legally entitled to an action
for theft, or to one for production on this account, because you were
not in possession of the said treasure, nor have you acted fraudulently
in order to avoid having possession of the same, since it may be that
you do not know that the treasure is in your land. It is not

unjust, however, where I make oath that I do not assert this claim for
purpose of annoyance, if an interdict or a judgment should be granted to
the effect that you shall not employ force against me to hinder me from
digging up, raising, and removing the said treasure, if I take no steps
to prevent security for the avoidance of threatened injury being
furnished you, on account of my acts. Where, however, the treasure is
stolen property, I am entitled to an action for theft.

\16. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X.*

Where a slave has anything in his possession, his owner is liable in his
own name to an action for production; but if the slave without the
knowledge of his owner, is guilty of fraud to avoid being in possession,
a noxal action for theft, or one for malicious fraud should be granted
on account of the slave, but no prætorian action can be brought for
production.

\17. *Ulpianus, On All Tribunals, Book IX.*

Where a party produces a slave who is disabled or blind, he should be
discharged from liability under this action, for he has produced him,
and a production of this kind is no impediment to a direct action, for
the plaintiff can still bring suit under the *Lex Aquilia* for the
damage sustained.

\18. *The Same, Opinions, Book VI.*

Where a note becomes worthless through payment and pledges are released,
the creditor can, nevertheless, bring suit for the production of
documents relating to the contract against anyone else than the debtor.

\19. *Paulus, Epitomes of Alfenus, Book IV.*

Any one who is interested can bring an action for production. A certain
person, however, made inquiry as to whether this action was available to
compel the production of the accounts of his adversary for his
inspection, as he alleged had a great interest in having the same

produced.

The answer was that the law should not be employed to cause annoyance,
and that terms ought not to be captiously construed, but that it was
proper to consider with what intention the words were uttered; for, in
accordance with this principle, if anyone was desirous of studying some
branch of knowledge, he might state that he had an interest in such and
such books being produced for his benefit, because if they were
produced, after he had read them he would become a more learned and a
better man.

\20. *Ulpianus, Rules, Book II.*

Where an action for production is brought on account of the offences of
slaves, torture may be employed for the purpose of making them reveal
their accomplices.
