# -*- mode: org -*-

THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS.

SECOND PART.

BOOK V.

TITLE I.

CONCERNING TRIALS AND WHERE ANYONE OUGHT TO BRING SUIT, OR BE SUED.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book II*.

Where persons voluntarily agree to submit to the jurisdiction of some
court, then this case can be heard by any judge who presides over said
court, or has jurisdiction therein, so far as the consenting parties are
concerned.

\2. *The Same, On the Edict, Book III*.

To "agree" is considered to mean that parties who are aware that they
are not subject to the jurisdiction of a certain judge, nevertheless
consent that he shall preside. If, however, they think that he has
jurisdiction, he will not, merely for that reason, have it; for, (as
Julianus says in the First Book of the Digest) the mistake of litigants
does not constitute an agreement; or, where they think that a person is
a prætor who is not one, this error does not also confer jurisdiction,
nor does any jurisdiction exist where one of the litigants refuses to
comply with the decision of the prætor and is forcibly compelled to do
so.

\(1) Is it sufficient for private parties to agree with one another, or
is the consent of the prætor also necessary? The *Lex Julia* on Trials
says, "In order to prevent private persons from coming to an agreement".
Hence, if private persons do agree, and the prætor is not aware that
they have done so, and he thinks that he has jurisdiction, should it not
be considered whether the requirements of the law have been complied
with, or not? And I think it may be held that he has jurisdiction.

\(2) Where anyone is appointed judge for a certain time, and all the
litigants agree that the time which he ordered to hear the case may be
extended, this may be done; unless an extension of time was especially
prohibited by order of the Emperor.

\(3) The right is granted deputies to have a case transferred to the
place of their residence, where some contract was entered into by them
before they were appointed; and similar privileges are conceded to those
who were summoned to give evidence, or have been sent for or appointed
to go to some province to preside as judges. Where a party has himself
appealed, he is not required to answer in proceedings in-

stituted by others during the time of his appeal at Rome, or elsewhere;
for Celsus states that, in this instance, the case may be transferred to
the place of his residence, since he came to Rome for some other
purpose. This opinion of Celsus is a reasonable one. For the Divine Pius
stated in a Rescript to Plotius Celsianus, that a party whom he had
summoned to Rome for the purpose of rendering the account of a
guardianship could not be compelled to join issue in a case involving
another guardianship in which he had not been summoned. He also stated
in the Rescript to Claudius Flavianus that a minor under twenty-five
years of age who petitioned for complete restitution against one
Asinianus who had come to Rome on some other business, had no right to
be heard there.

\(4) All these persons can have their cases transferred to the places of
their own domicile, if they did not contract where suit was brought
against them. If, however, they made the contract there, they have not
the right of removal; except envoys who, although they may have
contracted at Rome, provided they did so before their mission, are not
compelled to defend themselves in that city, so long as they remain
there as envoys. This Julianus also held, and the Divine Pius stated in
a Rescript. It is evident that if they remained at Rome after their
mission was concluded, then, as the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript,
suit can be brought against them there.

\(5) Moreover, if they entered into a contract outside of their own
province, but not in Italy, the question arises, can they be sued at
Rome? Marcellus states that they can only use the privilege of having a
case transferred to the place of their residence, when they entered into
the contract in their own city, or, at all events, in their own
province; which is true. But if they themselves bring an action, they
must defend themselves against all others; but not, however, where they
bring suit for injury done to them, or for theft, or for damages which
they have sustained during their absence from home; otherwise, as
Julianus very properly says, they would have to endure insult and loss
without being able to obtain redress; or anyone, by attacking them would
have the power to subject them to jurisdiction^1^ as soon as they claim
reparation.

\(6) If, however, any doubt should arise whether anyone in a case of
this kind can have it transferred to the place of his residence or not,
the prætor should decide the question after investigation. If he should
determine that the party had a right to have the case transferred to the
place of his residence, the latter must make arrangements to appear in
court for trial, after the prætor has fixed the day of his appearance.
Marcellus doubts whether he should merely execute a mere undertaking to
appear, or give security to do so, and it seems to me that his promise
alone would be sufficient, and this Mela also stated; otherwise, he
would be compelled to join issue instead of finding persons to give
security for him.

\(7) In all cases in which time is extended, this should be done without
causing any loss to creditors by lapse of time.

^1^ That is to say the jurisdiction of the tribunals at Rome.  ED.

\(8) The right of imposing a fine is conferred upon those who hold the
position of public judges, and to no others, unless this is specially
granted to them.

\3. *The Same, On the Edict, Book IV*.

A person is not presumed to conceal himself for the purpose of avoiding
a suit, if, even while he was present, he could not be compelled to join
issue.

\4. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book I*.

We have no legal right to bring an action against a person who is under
our control, unless with reference to *castrense peculium*.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book V*.

Where a party is summoned before the prætor from another jurisdiction,
he must appear, as is stated by Pomponius and Vindius; as it is the duty
of the prætor to decide whether he has jurisdiction, and those who are
summoned should not treat the "authority of the prætor with contempt;
for envoys and other persons who have the right to have their cases
transferred to the places where they reside, are in such a position that
they must appear, after having been summoned, in order to state their
privileges.

\6. *The Same, On the Edict, Book VI*.

A blind man can perform the duties of a judge.

\7. *The Same, On the Edict, Book VII*.

Where anyone has become a soldier, or subject to some other jurisdiction
after he has been summoned to appear in court, he will not have the
right to have his cause transferred, because he has been, as it were,
anticipated.

\8. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book II*.

Where anyone, during his mission, agrees to make payment of an
obligation which he contracted before becoming an envoy, he cannot be
compelled to defend himself in the place where he made the promise.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book IX*.

The islands belonging to Italy are a part of Italy, and the adjacent
islands are a part of each province.

\10. *The Same, On the Edict, Book X*.

A party is understood to "desist", not when he defers the case, but
where he abandons it altogether; for to desist means to relinquish any
proceeding which he had begun for the purpose of annoyance.

\(1) It is evident that if anyone, after he has ascertained the facts in
the case, gives it up, being unwilling to persevere in an action which
is unjust, and which he did not institute for the purpose of causing
annoyance, he is not held to have desisted.

\11. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XII*.

If anyone is arrogated by me who had previously joined issue in a suit
which he had brought against me, or which I had brought against him,
Marcellus says in the Third Book of the Digest that the case is
terminated, because no suit could have existed between us in the
beginning.

\12. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XVII*.

Where the prætor forbids one of several persons to preside as judge, he
is held to have allowed the others to do so.

\(1) Those authorities can appoint a judge to whom this right is granted
by a law, or by a constitution, or by a decree of the Senate. By a law;
for example, this right may be conferred upon a proconsul. He also can
appoint a judge to whom jurisdiction has been delegated, as, for
instance, the deputies of proconsuls. Moreover, those can do so to whom
it has been permitted by custom, on account of the Imperial authority
which they enjoy, for instance, the Prefect of the City, and other
magistrates at Rome.

\(2) Those who have the right to appoint judges cannot appoint them
indiscriminately; for some persons are prevented by law from becoming
judges; others are prevented by nature; and others, still, by custom. By
nature; as persons who are deaf, dumb, and such as are incurably insane,
as well as boys who are minors, because they are deficient in judgment.
A party is prevented by law, who has been expelled from the Senate.
Women and slaves are prevented by custom, not because they are deficient
in judgment, but because it has been established that they cannot
perform the duties belonging to civil employments.

\(3) When persons are eligible as judges, it makes no difference whether
they are under the control of another, or are their own masters.

\13. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII*.

In the three following actions, namely: those for partition of an
estate, the division of property held in common, and the establishment
of boundaries, the question arises who shall be considered as plaintiff,
because the condition of all the parties seems to be the same? It is the
better opinion that he should be considered the plaintiff who makes
application to the court.

\14. *Ulpianus, Disputations, Book II*.

Where, however, both parties apply to the court, it is customary to
determine the question by lot.

\15. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXI*.

Where the son of a family is a judge, and makes the case his own, he is
liable for a sum equal in value to his *peculium* when he rendered his
decision.

\(1) A judge is understood to make the case his own when he maliciously
renders a decision in violation of law. He is held to do this

maliciously, where it is clearly proved that either favor, enmity, or
even corruption, influenced him; and, under these circumstances, he can
be forced to pay the true amount of the matter in controversy.

\16. *The Same, On the Edict, Book V*.

Julianus thinks that where a judge makes a case his own, an action can
be brought against his heir; but this opinion is not correct, and has
been rejected by many authorities.

\17. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXII*.

Julianus says: That if one of the parties makes a judge his heir to
either the whole or a portion of his estate, recourse must be had to
another judge; because it is unjust for anyone to be made the judge of
his own cause.

\18. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIII*.

If a long time must elapse until the judge who has been appointed can
hear the case, the prætor orders him to be changed; and this happens,
for example, where some business occupies the judge and prevents him
from giving his attention to the trial; for instance, where he is
attacked by disease, or is compelled to go on a journey, or where his
private property is in danger.

\(1) Where the son of a family wishes to institute proceedings for
reparation for an injury on account of which his father has a right of
action, we only permit him to bring suit where there is no one who can
do so in behalf of his father; for it is the opinion of Julianus that if
the son of a family is absent on an embassy, or for the purpose of
pursuing his studies, and suffers theft, or unlawful damage to his
property, he is entitled to bring a prætorian action; since, if he
waited for his father to bring suit, the malicious act would go
unpunished, because his father might not come, or the party who
committed the wrong might absent himself before he arrived. Wherefore, I
have always held the opinion that where the cause of action did not
arise from a malicious act, but from a contract, the son ought to bring
a prætorian action; as, for instance, where he wishes to recover a
deposit, or sue on a mandate, or for money which he had loaned; and, in
that case, if his father was in the province, and he happened to be at
Rome, for the purpose of prosecuting his studies or for some other good
reason, and we did not grant him the action, he would, in consequence,
be defrauded with impunity, and live at Rome in want, because he did not
obtain the property which his father intended for his expenses. And
suppose that the son of a family in question is a Senator, and has a
father in the province; would not the equity of this be increased by his
rank?

\19. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LX*.

When the heir is absent, he must make his defence in the place where the
deceased contracted the debt, and he must be sued there if he can be
found; and he cannot allege any peculiar privilege by way of exemption.

\(1) Where anyone has been managing a guardianship or a curatorship, or
some business, or banking, or anything else from which obligations
arise, in any particular place, he must defend himself there, even if
that is not his residence; and if he does not make a defence and has no
home there, he must permit possession to be taken of his property.

\(2) In like manner, if he sold merchandise in any particular place, or
otherwise disposed of it, or purchased it; it is held that he must
defend himself there, unless it had been agreed upon that he should do
so elsewhere. Shall we say then that a party who has made purchases from
a merchant who is a stranger, or sold goods to someone whom he knew was
about to depart immediately, has no right to obtain possession of his
property, but must follow the latter to the place where he resides;
while if anyone makes a purchase from a person who has rented a shop, or
a warehouse, in some particular place, is he in such a position that he
can be sued there? This conclusion is the more reasonable one, for when
a party comes to a place with the expectation of soon leaving it, you
can make a purchase from him just as you could from a traveller, or from
one who is making a journey either by land or sea; and it would be a
great hardship that no matter where a man travelled either by sea or
land he could be sued, and be compelled to defend himself. But if he
remains anywhere, I do not mean by way of residence, but because he
rented a small shop, or booth, or granary, or warehouse, or office, and
sells merchandise there, he will then be compelled to defend himself in
that place.

\(3) The question is raised by Labeo, if a man belonging to a province
has a slave acting as his agent for the purpose of selling merchandise
at Rome, any contract entered into with said slave must be considered as
if it was made with his master; and therefore, the party must defend
himself at Rome.

\(4) It should be remembered that a person who is bound to make payment
in Italy, if his residence is in a province, can be sued in either
place; and this opinion is adopted also by Julianus and many others.

\20. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book LVIII*.

It must be held that every obligation should be considered as based upon
a contract, so that, wherever anyone binds himself, he is held to have
made a contract, even though the transaction was not one of indebtedness
arising out of a loan.

\21. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXX*.

Where I wish to institute proceedings against a debtor, the approved
course is that, if he admits that he owes the money and states that he
is ready to pay it, he must be heard, and time must be granted him for
making payment under a sufficient bond; for no great injury can result
from delay for a reasonable time.

\(1) By a "reasonable time" must be understood that which is granted
defendants for payment, after judgment has been rendered against them.

\22. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book III*.

Where a party is not compelled to defend an action in a certain place;
if he himself brings suit there, he can be compelled to defend suits
also, and to appear before the same judge.

\23. *The Same, On Plautius, Book VII*.

Anything which comes up after issue has been joined cannot be considered
as before the court; and therefore it will be necessary to make a new
application.

\24. *The Same, On Plautius, Book XVII*.

No action will lie at Rome against persons whom the Emperor has summoned
there, except where they make a contract during the time they remain.

\(1) Envoys are compelled to answer in suits at Rome on account of
offences committed while there in that capacity, whether they themselves
commit them or their slaves.

\(2) Where an action *in rem* is asked for against an envoy, and the
said action is founded on present possession, shall it be granted?
Cassius stated that the rule to be observed is that, if the action would
cause the envoy to be deprived of all his slaves, it should not be
granted; but if it only related to one slave out of several, it ought
not to be refused. Julianus says, without making any distinction, that
the action should be denied, and this is reasonable, since the action is
not granted lest the party be turned aside from the duties of the office
which he has undertaken.

\25. *Julianus, Digest, Book I*.

Where a man, while on a mission, purchases a slave, or any other
property, or, for any other reason comes into possession of the same, he
is not unjustly required to join issue in a suit having reference to
said property; otherwise, power will be given to envoys under this
pretext to carry away to their own homes the property of others.

\26. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book XVII*.

Cassius states with reference to an envoy who entered upon an estate,
that, even where he enters upon it at Rome, an action cannot be brought
against him, lest his mission might be interfered with; and this is
true. An action is not even granted to legatees against him, but they
can be put in possession of property belonging to the estate, unless he
gives security, which rule also applies to creditors of the estate.

\27. *Julianus, Digest, Book I*.

For what will prevent an envoy from performing the duties of his office
while there is an agent in possession of the property of the estate for
the purpose of taking care of it?

\28. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book XVII*.

But where an estate is delivered to him under the Trebellian Decree, an
action against him will not be granted, whether the heir entered

upon the estate voluntarily, or under compulsion; for it is certainly
more convenient for the estate to be delivered to him; hence it should
be considered as if he himself had entered upon the estate.

\(1) On the other hand, if an envoy, during the time of his mission,
enters upon an estate and delivers it, an action will be granted against
the beneficiary of the trust; nor will an exception under the Trebellian
law be available, on account of the position of the envoy; as this is
for the personal benefit of the latter.

\(2) In those instances where an envoy is not forced to join issue in an
action, he cannot be compelled to make oath that he is not obliged to
pay, for the reason that his oath takes the place of a joinder of issue.

\(3) An envoy must promise reparation for threatened injury, or permit
his neighbor to take possession of the building.

\(4) Where the time for bringing an action is about to expire, the
prætor shall permit it to be brought against the envoy, if proper cause
is shown, in order that issue may be joined, and the case transferred to
the envoy's place of residence.

\(5) Where the head of a family dies and leaves a son, and his widow is
pregnant, the son cannot legally collect from the debtors half the money
loaned to them, although afterwards one son should be born; because
several more might have been born, since, in the nature of things, it
was certain that one child would be born. Sabinus and Cassius, however,
are of the opinion that a fourth part of the debts might be collected,
for the reason that it is uncertain whether three would not be born, and
that we need not pay any attention to the nature of things where all are
certain, as whatever is going to occur does occur; but we should
consider our own ignorance.

\29. *The Same, On Plautius, Book VIII*.

The party who first makes application is the plaintiff.

\30. *Marcellus, Digest, Book I*.

Wherever issue is joined, the case should also be terminated there.

\31. *Celsus, Digest, Book XXVII*.

Where a plaintiff dies and leaves several heirs, and one of them
institutes proceedings, it is not true that everything involved in the
case up to that time is in Court; for no one can conduct a suit in court
which has already been begun by another, if his co-heir does not
consent.

\32. *Ulpianus, On the Office of Proconsul, Book I*.

Where the judge appointed to render a decision within a certain time
dies, and another is appointed in his stead, we understand that the same
time is fixed with respect to the latter, although the magistrate did
not expressly mention this when making the appointment; provided that
the term prescribed by law is not exceeded.

\33. *Modestinus, Rules, Book III*.

A party is not held to have accepted a certain judge who asks his
adversary to state the nature of his case before that judge.

\34. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XV*.

When a party dies after having joined issue at Rome, his heir, even
though he resides beyond sea, must defend the case at Rome, because he
succeeds to the place of him by whom he was appointed heir.

\35. *The Same, Epistles, Book X*.

It is not true that, as the obligation of a surety can be left dependent
upon circumstances or contracted for at some future time, so also a suit
may be contingent, or in such terms that an obligation may be
subsequently incurred; for I do not think that anyone would doubt that a
surety can be accepted before the obligation of the principal debtor is
incurred, but issue cannot be joined before some indebtedness arises.

\36. *Callistratus, Inquiries, Book I*.

Sometimes hearings are postponed for good reasons and on account of
certain parties; as, for instance, where documents relating to a case
are said to be in possession of persons who will be absent on public
business. Therefore the Divine Brothers stated the following in a
Rescript: "Humanity demands that postponement should be granted on
account of accidental misfortunes; for example, where a father who was a
party to the case has lost his son, or his daughter; or a wife her
husband; or a son his parent; and in similar cases the hearing should be
postponed for a reasonable time."

\(1) Where a senator voluntarily undertakes to attend to the affairs of
another in a province, he can not refuse to defend an action on the
ground of business transacted; and Julianus says that he must defend the
action, since he voluntarily assumed this obligation.

\37. *The Same, Inquiries, Book V*.

Where inquiry is made concerning violence and the existence of
possession, investigation must be made of the violence before the
ownership of the property is considered; in accordance with a Rescript
of the Divine Hadrian in the Greek language directed to the Commonwealth
of Thessaly.

\38. *Licinnius Rufinus, Rules, Book IV*.

Where property is bequeathed by a legacy, and suit is brought to recover
it by an action *in personam*, it must be delivered where it is, unless
it has been maliciously removed by the heir; and then it shall be
surrendered where suit is brought for it. Again, a legacy consisting of
articles which may be weighed, counted, or measured, must be delivered
where suit is brought for it; unless the following words were added, "A
hundred measures of corn from such-and-such a granary", or "so many
*amphoræ* from such-and-such a cask". Where, however, suit is brought
for a legacy by an action *in rem, *it must also be brought where the
property is. If the latter is movable, an action for its production will
lie against the heir to compel him to produce it, for then suit can be
brought by the legatee for its recovery.

\39. *Papinianus, Questions, Book III*.

Where an insane person is appointed judge, the trial will not be
prevented because he cannot preside at that time; so that, when he
renders a decision after having recovered the use of his faculties, it
may stand. In the appointment of a judge neither his presence nor his
knowledge is necessary.

\(1) Where a party comes to Rome on a mission, he can become a surety in
any case; since he cannot make use of his privilege when he enters into
a contract in Italy.

\40. *The Same, Questions, Book IV*.

It is not every act which can be performed by the authority of a judge
which is subjected to the restraints of the law.

\(1) If a judge, in the performance of his functions, should maliciously
omit something which is contrary to the rules of law, he is guilty of an
offence against the law.

\41. *The Same, Questions, Book XI*.

In all *bona-fide* actions, when the day of payment of money has not
arrived, and anyone makes application for the execution of a bond, it
will be allowed where proper cause is shown.

\42. *The Same, Questions, Book XXIV*.

Where the wife of an envoy is divorced at Rome, it has been held that
her husband must make his defence at Rome, when the recovery of her
dowry is involved.

\43. *The Same, Questions, Book XXVII*.

Where a person stipulates that a house shall be built for him at Capua
within a certain time; it is established that when the time has elapsed,
he can bring an action for damages for the amount of his interest,
anywhere.

\44. *The Same, Opinions, Book II*.

The functions of a judge are not interfered with by the fact that, after
a suit has been begun against all the guardians, some of them have been
absent on public business; since the administration of those who are
present can be distinguished and investigated separately from that of
those who are not defended.

\(1) Where a person in whose behalf an action has been brought by an
agent is afterwards ascertained to be a slave, the debtor should be
discharged; but the principal will not be barred for this reason, if he
should subsequently decide to bring the action himself.

\45. *The Same, Opinions, Book III*.

A banker must be sued where the contract was made with him, and, in such
a case, a postponement will not be granted except for good cause; as,
for instance, to permit his books to be brought from a province. The
same rule applies to an action on guardianship.

\(1) Where the guardians of a female ward have a decision rendered
against them in a province, the curators of the ward may be comoelled to
comply with the decree at Rome, where the mother of the ward borrowed
the money, and her daughter was her heir.

\46. *Paulus, Questions, Book II*.

Where a judge has been appointed, he remains in office even though he
becomes insane, because he was properly appointed judge in the
beginning; but a serious illness excuses him from presiding, and
therefore some one should be appointed in his stead.

\47. *Callistratus, Questions, Book I*.

Care must be exercised that a person be not appointed judge, whom either
side expressly petitions for; as the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript
that this would offer a bad precedent unless it should be especially
allowed by the Emperor through respect for him whose appointment was
requested.

\48. *Paulus, Opinions, Book II*.

The following is a portion of a letter of the Divine Hadrian,
"Magistrates, during the year of their office, cannot institute any
legal proceedings of their own either as plaintiffs or as defendants;
nor can they act officially in any matter in which they are interested
on the ground of either guardianship or curatorship. But as soon as the
term of their magistracy has expired, it will be just and proper for
actions to be brought both for and against them".

\49. *The Same, Opinions, Book III*.

A vendor who was called upon by a purchaser to defend him in a suit
brought by a party who claimed the property as owner, stated that he had
the right to have his own judge. The question arose whether he could
remove the case from the tribunal of the judge before whom proceedings
had been begun between the plaintiff and the purchaser to that of his
own judge. Paulus answered that it is customary for the vendor to appear
before the judge of the purchaser.

\50. *Ulpianus, Trusts, Book VI*.

Where an action for the execution of a trust is brought by anyone, and
the defendant alleges that the greater portion of the estate is situated
elsewhere, he cannot be forced to execute the trust; and it is provided
by many constitutions that where an action is brought to enforce
compliance with a trust, this must be done where the greater portion of
the estate is situated; unless it is proved that the testator wished the
trust to be executed where suit was brought.

\(1) The question has been raised with respect to borrowed money;
whether when the greater part of the indebtedness was in the province
where suit is brought to enforce a trust, could the action be
transferred to some other place, because the bulk of the estate was
elsewhere? It was, however, established in this instance that the fact
of the indebtedness is of no importance, as it is not dependent on the

place, but on the entire assets of the estate; for a debt is a
diminution of the entire estate, and not of the assets in any particular
locality. But what if this part of the estate were charged with some
burden, as, for instance, to furnish support which the testator ordered
to be done at Rome, or with taxes; or with any other unavoidable
burdens; in these instances would the party be entitled to have the case
transferred? I think that it may be said with great justice that he
would.

\(2) It has, however, been stated in a rescript that suit should be
brought to enforce a trust in the place where the heir resides. But
whenever anyone begins to make payment in compliance with the terms of
the trust, he cannot subsequently avail himself of this resource:

\51. *Marcianus, Institutes, Book VIII*.

Even though the estate should have descended to a man who has his
domicile in a province. The Divine Severus and Antoninus, however,
stated in a Rescript that if the party should consent to discharge the
trust elsewhere, he is bound to do so in the place agreed upon.

\52. *Ulpianus, Trusts, Book VI*.

But if the heir appears in an action on the trust and makes use of other
defences, but neglects this one, he cannot afterwards have recourse to
it, even before a decision is rendered.

\(1) Where a testator directs in his will that tickets for grain should
be purchased for his freedmen; then, although the greater portion of the
estate is in a province, still, the trust must be carried out at Rome;
which is the proper opinion, since it is evident that it was the
intention of the testator that this should be done, on account of the
nature of the purchase.

\(2) Moreover, if you should suggest the following case, namely: that a
certain amount of silver or gold was bequeathed to such-and-such
illustrious persons, and there is enough of the estate at Rome to
execute the trust, even though the greater portion of the estate is
situated in a province; it should be held that the trust must be
discharged at Rome; for it is not very probable that a testator who
intended to show honor to those to whom he bequeathed such moderate
legacies under the trust, should have desired them to be paid in the
province.

\(3) Where the property left under a trust is at hand, it must be held
that anyone who brings suit for it cannot be barred by an exception on
the ground that the greater portion of the estate is elsewhere.

\(4) Where, however, the property which is the subject of the trust is
not to be sued for where it is situated, but security for the execution
of the trust is to be given; it must be considered whether an exception
can be pleaded (and I do not think that it can) and, indeed, even if
there is no property there, still the party must be required to furnish
security. For what is there to fear, since, if he does not give
security, his adversary will be placed in possession in order to protect
the trust?

\53. *Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book I*.

There are only a few cases in which slaves are permitted to appear
against their masters; and one of them is where they state that a
certain will, by which they allege they were bequeathed their freedom,
has been suppressed. Slaves are also permitted to give information
against their masters where the latter have withheld deliveries of grain
belonging to the Roman people, as well as returns of property for
taxation, and also for counterfeiting. Moreover, they can institute
proceedings to obtain their freedom left to them by a trust, and also
where they allege that they have been purchased with their own money,
and not manumitted, in violation of the good faith of the agreement.
Also, where a slave has been declared to be free by will when he renders
his accounts, he can legally demand an arbiter as against his master,
for the purpose of examining his accounts. Where anyone has relied upon
the good faith of another, with the understanding that he should be
purchased with the money of the former, and be manumitted when he had
repaid it, and the party says that he is unwilling to receive the money
when it is tendered, power is granted to the slave to disclose the terms
of the agreement.

\54. *Paulus, Opinions, Book I*.

*A* matter of greater importance should not be prejudiced by one of
inferior moment; for the more important question attracts that which is
of lesser weight.

\55. *The Same, On the Office of Assessors*.

A summons issued by a former judge should be regarded as one of the
three prescribed. It is evident even if the entire number has been
completed by the said judge, that custom requires his successor to issue
another.

\56. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX*.

Although it is true that a genuine agent can bring anything before a
court, still, where a party who is not an agent joins issue, and his
principal afterwards confirms what he has done; it is held that by
retroactive effect, the matter has been properly presented to the court.

\57. *The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLI*.

An action can be brought against the son of a family with reference to
both contracts and offences, but where a son dies after joinder of
issue, the right of action will be transferred to his father; only,
however, with reference to his *peculium* or any advantage which he may
have obtained. It is evident that if the son of a family undertakes a
defence as the agent of another, then, if he dies, the right of action
will be transferred to the party whom he defended.

\58. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XIII*.

A suit is terminated where the party who applied for it to be heard
forbids it to proceed; or, indeed, anyone does so who has superior au-

thority in the same jurisdiction; or even where the judge himself is
vested with authority equal to that of him who appointed him.

\59. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book LI*.

If, in the appointment of a judge, the place in which he is to discharge
his duties is not mentioned, he is held to be appointed to act in that
place where he can do so without inconvenience to the litigants.

\60. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XIV*.

When a judge dies, he who succeeds him must follow the same course which
was laid down for his predecessor.

\61. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVI*.

We are usually accustomed to say that the matter before the court is
that which was agreed upon by the litigants; but Celsus states that it
is dangerous to apply to the defendant for information on this point,
because he will always say that no agreement was made, in order to avoid
losing his case. What then shall be done? It is better to hold that the
subject of the trial is not what the parties agreed upon; but that is
not the subject of the trial which it was expressly agreed that it
should not be.

\(1) A judge who has jurisdiction in cases of robbery cannot hear and
decide actions in which money is involved.

\62. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LIX*.

An action cannot proceed between two litigants unless where one of them
is the claimant and the other the possessor of the property; for there
must be someone to bear the burden of the plaintiff, and another who
enjoys the advantage of possession.

\63. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XLIX*.

A legitimate defence is one where the party joins issue, either himself
or by another, but always furnishing security; and no one is considered
to make a legal defence who does not pay what he is ordered by the
court.

\64. *The Same, Disputations, Book I*.

An estimate of damages for fraud is not made by the judge with reference
to the interest of the party who brings the suit, but is based upon what
he swears to in court; and there is no doubt that even a thief has a
right of action on the ground of deposit or loan for use.

\(1) Where anyone is about to bring a suit of one kind and accepts
security that the judgment will be complied with, and then brings
another kind of a suit; an action cannot be brought on the stipulation,
because it seems to have been made with reference to something else.

\65. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXIV*.

A woman must bring an action for her dowry where her husband has his
residence, and not where the dotal contract was entered into; for this
is not such a contract that it is necessary to take into consid-

eration the locality where the said instrument was executed, so much as
the place to which the woman herself, in accordance with the condition
of marriage, would always have returned as to her home.

\66. *The Same, Disputations, Book II*.

Where anyone makes use of ambiguous language, or his intention is
doubtful, he must be understood in the sense which is most favorable to
himself.

\67. *The Same, Disputations, Book VI*.

Where a slave states that he has been purchased with his own money, and
proves it, he will be free from the time when he was purchased; because
the Imperial Constitution does not direct that he shall be declared
free, but orders that his freedom shall be restored to him, hence his
master can be required to manumit a slave who purchases himself with his
own money; but if the master conceals himself, the precedents derived
from decrees of the Senate relative to grants of freedom under a trust
must be followed.

\68. *The Same, Disputations, Book VIII*.

In the case of a peremptory citation the following rule must be
observed; the party bringing the action may apply for one summons if his
adversary is absent, and subsequently for a second:

\69. *The Same, On All Tribunals, Book IV*. After an interval of not
less than ten days;

\70. *The Same, Disputations, Book VIII*.

And then a third; and these having been issued, he can afterwards obtain
a peremptory citation. This term is employed because it puts an end to
the controversy; that is to say, it does not permit the adversary to
longer delay.

\71. *The Same, On All Tribunals, Book IV*.

In the peremptory citation the magistrate who issues it gives notice
that he will hear and decide the case even should the other party be
absent.

\72. *The Same, Disputations, Book VIII*.

This citation is sometimes granted after the three others have preceded
it, sometimes after only one, or two, have been issued, and sometimes it
is granted at once, and is designated "one for all". The course to be
pursued shall be determined by him who exercises jurisdiction, and he
must arrange the order of the citations, or regulate them according to
the circumstances of the case, or of the person, or of the time.

\73. *The Same, On All Tribunals, Book IV*.

After a peremptory citation has been obtained, and as soon as the day
mentioned therein arrives, the absent party must be called; and

whether he answers, or not, the case must proceed and decision be
rendered, but not always in favor of the party who is present; for
sometimes the absent party may prevail if he has a good case.

\(1) But if the party who obtained the peremptory citation is absent on
the day appointed for the hearing, and he against whom it was obtained
is present, the peremptory citation must be annulled, and the cause
shall not be heard, nor shall a decision be rendered in favor of the
party who is present.

\(2) If the citation is annulled, let us consider whether the defendant
can be sued again, and whether the right of action still remains, or
whether merely the proceeding relating to this citation is annulled? The
better opinion is, that it only is annulled, and that the parties can
litigate again.

\(3) It should be borne in mind that where an absent party has a
judgment rendered against him on account of a peremptory citation, and
appeals, he shall not be heard; that is, if he was absent through
contumacy; but if he was not, he should be heard.

\74. *Julianus, Digest, Book V*.

A judge can be compelled to render a decision with reference to any
matter of which he has taken cognizance.

\(1) A judge appointed to render a decision for some particular amount
can also decide with reference to a greater one, as this is agreed upon
by the litigants.

\(2) Where I once consented to defend an absent party, and joined issue
when the defendant was already dead, and I was defeated, and paid the
damages; the question arose whether the heir was released, and also what
kind of an action I was entitled to against him? I answered that the
decision was not valid, as the debtor was already dead when issue was
joined, and therefore the heir was not released; but if the party
conducting the defence had made payment in accordance with the judgment,
while he could not recover the money, still, an action would lie in his
favor against the heir on the ground of business transacted; and
certainly the heir could protect himself by an exception based on bad
faith, if suit was brought against him by the plaintiff.

\75. *The Same, Digest, Book XXXVI*.

Where the prætor has ordered a party against whom an action is brought
for a debt, to appear; and the number of citations is exhausted; and he
decides that the absent party owes the debt, and suit is brought to
enforce the judgment; the judge who hears the case cannot examine the
decree of the prætor, otherwise citations of this kind and the decrees
of the prætors would be illusory.

Marcellus says in a note: "Where the plaintiff knowingly and falsely
states anything with malicious intent, and it is clearly established
that in this way he obtained a judgment in his favor from the prætor; I
think that the judge should admit the complaint of the defendant."
Paulus says in a note, that if the defendant was unable to be present

because he was prevented by illness, or was employed in some business
for the State, it is his opinion that in this case an action to enforce
the judgment against him should be refused, or the prætor ought not to
permit execution to be issued.

\76. *Alfenus, Digest, Book VI*.

The following case was suggested. Certain judges were appointed to hear
the same action, some of them having been excused after it was tried,
others were appointed in their stead; and the question arose whether the
change of some individual judges left the case in the same condition, or
placed it in a different one? I answered that not only one or two might
be changed, but all of them as well, and that the action would continue
to be the same that it was previously, and in fact this was not the only
case in which it happened that though the parts were changed, still the
thing itself was considered to be the same, but this occurred in many
other instances. For a legion is considered to be the same, even though
many of those belonging to it may have been killed, and others put in
their places; and the people are deemed to be the same now as they were
a hundred years ago, although not one of them may at present be living;
and also, where a ship has been so frequently repaired that not even a
single plank remains which is not new, she is still considered to be the
same ship. And if anyone should think that if its parts are changed, an
article would become a different thing, the result would be that,
according to this rule, we ourselves would not be the same persons that
we were a year ago, because, as the philosophers inform us, the very
smallest particles of which we consist are daily detached from our
bodies, and others from outside are being substituted for them.
Therefore, where the outward appearance of anything remains unaltered,
the thing itself is considered to be the same.

\77. *Africanus, Questions, Book III*.

In private business, a father may act as judge where his son is
interested, and *vice versa:*

\78. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book XVI*. Since judging is a public
employment.

\79. *Ulpianus, On the Office of Proconsul, Book V*.

Where a party is proved to have summoned his adversary to court without
a good cause, he will be obliged to refund him his traveling expenses,
as well as the costs of the suit.

\(1) Where judges are perplexed with reference to the law, it is
customary for the governors to state their opinions, but where the
latter are consulted on a question of fact, they are not compelled to do
so, and they must order the judges to render a decision, as their
consciences may dictate; as, where opinions are given under such
circumstances, it sometimes causes scandal, and furnishes an opportunity
for partiality or corrupt solicitation.

\80. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book II*.

Where a mistake is made in the name or surname of a judge, it was the
opinion of Servius that if the judge was appointed by an agreement of
the litigants, he must act as judge whom both litigants had in view.

\81. *Ulpianus, Opinions, Book V*.

Anyone who is not invested with jurisdiction, or is not granted
authority by the Emperor, nor appointed by an official who has the right
to appoint judges, or not selected by agreement for arbitration, or not
confirmed by some law, cannot act as judge.

\82. *The Same, On the Office of Proconsul, Book I*.

Sometimes the magistrates of the Roman people are accustomed to
expressly appoint court attendants arbiters, which should be done very
rarely, and only where the case is urgent.

TITLE II. CONCERNING INOFFICIOUS TESTAMENTS.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book IV*.

It must be borne in mind that complaints are frequently made with
reference to inofficious testaments, as it is lawful for all persons,
whether they be parents or children, to attack an inofficious testament.
Those relatives who are beyond the degree of brothers will do better,
however, not to trouble themselves by incurring useless expense, since
they have no hope of success.

\2. *Marcianus, Institutes, Book IV*.

Proceedings are instituted in the case of an inofficious testament on
the ground that the testator was not of sound mind when he made his
will. It is not understood by this that he was actually insane, or
demented, when he executed his will, but that he made it according to
law, yet not in compliance with the dictates of paternal or filial
affection; for if he were actually insane or demented, his will would be
void.

\3. *Marcellus, Digest, Book HI*.

To say that a will is inofficious means to allege that the party should
not have been disinherited or passed over; because it generally happens
that where parents are improperly influenced to disinherit or pass over
their children, this is due to false representations.

\4. *Gaius, On the Lex Glitia*.

Parents should not be allowed to wrong their children by their wills,
since for the most part they do so because they are maliciously
prejudiced against their own blood by the flattery and instigation of
stepmothers.

\5. *Marcellus, Digest, Book III*.

Those, also, who are not descended from the testator in the male line,
have the right to institute proceedings, as they can do so in case of
the testament of a mother; and they very frequently succeed. The force
of the term "inofficious" is, (as I have already stated), to show that
the party was undeservedly and therefore improperly passed over, or even
excluded by disinheritance, and the allegation is made in court that the
testator does not appear to have been of sound mind when he executed an
unjust will.

\6. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIV*.

A posthumous son can allege that a will is inofficious where the
testator was one to whom he might have been a proper or lawful heir, if
he was unborn at the time of the death of the former. He has also a
right to attack the wills of cognates, since, in this instance, he would
be able to obtain possession of the property in case of intestacy. What
then? Should the testator be blamed for not dying intestate? But no one
could obtain assent from a judge where such a proposition was advanced;
for parties of this kind are not prohibited from making wills. This,
however, he can clearly be charged with, namely: not appointing the
party his heir, for an heir who has been appointed can be placed in
possession in accordance with the clause by which possession can be
granted to the mother of an unborn child; and if it was born, it would
be entitled to possession in accordance with the provisions of the will.
I hold that, in like manner, the complaint can be brought by a party
who, after the will of his mother was made, was removed from her womb by
the Cæsarean operation.

\(1) Where a person has no right to succession by intestacy institutes
proceedings on the ground that the will is inofficious, and no one
contests his right to do so, and he happens to succeed, his success will
be of no benefit to him, but will only be of advantage to those who are
entitled to the succession on intestacy, for he makes the former head of
the family intestate.

\(2) Where anyone dies after having instituted proceedings on the ground
of inofficiousness, does he transfer his right of complaint to his heir?
Papinianus answered (and this is also stated in several rescripts) ,
that if the party should die after he has already obtained possession of
the property of the estate, the right of proceeding with the action
passes to the heir; and where the possession of the property is not
demanded, but the controversy has already begun or is in course of
preparation, or if the party should die after having arrived for the
purpose of filing a complaint on the ground of inofficiousness; I think
that the right passes to his heir.

\7. *Paulus, On the Jurisdiction of the Septemvirs*.

Let us consider in what way a party may be held to have prepared his
case, so that he can transmit the right of action. Let us suppose that
he was under the control of the testator, so that the possession of the
estate would not be necessary for him, and entrance upon the es-

tate would be superfluous; and if he merely gave notice that he intends
to make such a charge, and proceeds to serve notice, or to file the
petition, he will transmit the right to prosecute the case to his heir;
and this the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript with reference to the
service of the papers and the notice. What course should be pursued
where the party was not under the control of the deceased? Would the
right of action be transmitted to his heir? If he did the things which
we have mentioned above, he would seem to have properly prepared his
case.

\8. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIV*.

Papinianus very properly says in the Fifth Book of Questions, that a
father cannot institute proceedings on the ground of inofficiousness in
behalf of his son, if the latter is unwilling; for the wrong was
committed against the son. He states immediately afterwards that if his
son should die after having obtained possession of the estate, with a
view to proceeding regularly with the case, the complaint for
inofficiousness is terminated; for it was not granted to the father
himself, but on account of his son.

\(1) Where a party abandons the case after having instituted proceedings
on the ground of inofficiousness, he shall not afterwards be heard.

\(2) It has very frequently been stated in rescripts that when the
Emperor is appointed an heir, the testament can be declared inofficious.

\(3) Papinianus, in the Second Book of Opinions, says that a complaint
for an inofficious testament can be brought against the head of a family
who is a veteran, even though the only property which he owns is what he
obtained in military service.

\(4) Where a soldier makes a will while in the army, and dies a year
after he is discharged, I doubt whether a complaint for inofficiousness
will be allowed, because his will is valid up to this time, in
accordance with military law, and it may be said that a complaint on the
ground of inofficiousness is not available.

\(5) A mother cannot claim that the will of her son who is under age is
inofficious, because his father made it for him; and Papinianus gave
this opinion; nor can his father's brother do so, because it is the will
of the son; therefore, the brother of the minor cannot do so either, if
he did not object to his own father's testament. Where, however, the
testament of the father is attacked successfully, that of his son will
be void, unless it was broken only with reference to his father, for
then the pupillary part will remain valid.

\(6) Where anyone makes a donation *mortis causa* to his son of the
fourth part of what he would have been entitled to if the testator had
died intestate, I am of the opinion that his will is secure.

\(7) Where a man provided a substitute for his son, who is a minor, by
making a secondary bequest, we cannot, for this reason permit the minor
himself to file a complaint for inofficiousness.

\(8) Since the fourth part of the share which is due is sufficient to
exclude the complaint, it should be considered whether a disinherited

child, who does not object, should be included, as, for example, where
there are two sons who are disinherited; and no doubt he should be
included, as Papinian states; and if the other should say that the will
is inofficious, he cannot claim the entire estate, but only half of the
same. Thus, for the same reason, where there are grandchildren, the
issue of two sons, for instance, three by one of them, and only one by
the other; the son who is alone will be excluded from the complaint by
obtaining three-twenty-fourths of the estate, and any one of the others
by obtaining one twenty-fourth of the same.

\(9) This fourth part will, of course, be estimated after the debts and
funeral expenses have been deducted; but it must be considered whether
testamentary grants of freedom will diminish the fourth part, and do
they diminish it? For if anyone is appointed sole heir, he cannot claim
that the will is inofficious, because he has received the Falcidian
portion; but the *Lex Falcidia* does not apply to testamentary
manumissions, and it may be held that the fourth part is to be entered
on after deducting what is lost by manumission; therefore, as it is
established that the fourth part is reduced by manumission, the result
will be that, where a person's estate consists of slaves, by
emancipating them he bars a complaint for an inofficious testament;
unless, perhaps, his son, if he was not under his control after being
appointed the heir of his father, may properly reject the estate, and
having transmitted it to the substitute, may begin proceedings for
inofficiousness, so as to obtain the estate on the ground of intestacy
without being liable to the penalty prescribed by the Edict.

\(10) Where a testator directed his heir to fulfill some condition
having reference to his son, or to some other person who had a right to
bring the same complaint, and he knowingly agreed to this, it should be
considered whether he is prevented from making a complaint for
inofficiousness, since he accepted the will of the deceased.

The case is the same where the party who gave him the donation was a
legatee, or a *statuliber;* and it may be said that the son is
prevented, and especially where the testator ordered the heir to make
the gift; but if it was a legatee, may it not be true that where the
right to file a complaint for inofficiousness has once vested, the
tender by the legatee will not abrogate it? For why did we absolutely
establish this principle in the case of the heir? It was because no
right to file a complaint arises before he had entered upon the estate.
I think that, in this instance, the event must be followed, so that if
what was left was tendered to the son before proceedings were instituted
by him, then it appears that he has all that he is entitled to, as the
donation was offered in accordance with the wishes of the testator.

\(11) Wherefore, if anyone has been appointed heir, for instance to one
half the estate, when a sixth would have been coming to him from the
testator's property if he had died intestate, and he is asked to
surrender the estate after a certain time; it can reasonably be held
that he cannot bring an action, since he could have the share which was
due to him, and the profits of the same, for it is well established that
the profits are usually included in the Falcidian portion. There-

fore, where, in the beginning, an heir was appointed to half the estate,
and afterwards is asked to relinquish his inheritance after the
expiration of ten years; there is no ground on which to make complaint,
since he could during that time, easily have collected the share that
was due to him together with the profits of the same.

\(12) Where a party alleges that a will is void, defective, and
inofficious, the choice should be given him as to which claim he wished
to make first.

\(13) Where a son who has been disinherited is in possession of the
estate, and the party who has been appointed heir brings suit to recover
it; the son can file the complaint by way of cross action, just as he
would do if he were not in possession but was bringing an action for
recovery.

\(14) It must be remembered that where a party improperly alleges that a
testament is inofficious, and loses his case, he will also lose what was
left him by the testament, and it can be recovered in a suit by the
Treasury as property of which he was deprived because he was unworthy of
it. He is, however, only deprived of what was bequeathed to him by the
will, where he, without any ground, continued to prosecute the case
until judgment was rendered. Where, however, he desisted or died before
judgment, he will not be deprived of what was left him. Hence, if while
he was absent, a decision was pronounced in favor of the other party,
who was present, it may be said that he can hold what was left him. A
party, however, can only lose anything where the enjoyment of it belongs
to him; and if he is asked to surrender it to another, no injury should
be done. Wherefore, Papinianus not incorrectly states in the Second Book
of Opinions, that where a party is appointed an heir and is asked to
surrender the estate, and then, after bringing complaint for
inofficiousness, does not succeed, he only loses what he could have
obtained under the *Lex Falcidia*.

\(15) Where a minor has been arrogated, and is one of those persons who
can make complaint of an inofficious testament without depending upon
adoption or emancipation to do so; I think that he will be barred, since
he is entitled to a fourth part of the estate, according to the
Constitution of the Divine Pius. If, however, he brings suit, and does
not obtain a judgment, will he lose this fourth part? I am of the
opinion that he should not be permitted to contest the will on the
ground of inofficiousness, or if he should be permitted, even if he does
not gain the suit, to have the fourth part granted him as a debt which
is due to him.

\(16) Where a judge investigates a case based on an inofficious
testament and renders a decree against the testament, and no appeal is
taken, the testament is rescinded by operation of law; and the party who
succeeds will become the direct heir, or the possessor of the property
in accordance with the terms of the decree; testamentary grants of
freedom will become void by operation of law; legacies will not be due;
and if they have been paid they can be recovered either by him who paid
them or by the successful litigant (by means of a prætorian action).
Generally, however, where they have been paid before pro-

ceedings were instituted, the successful litigant should bring suit for
their recovery; as the Divine Hadrian and the Divine Pius stated in a
Rescript.

\(17) It is certain that if the claim of inofficiousness is alleged for
some very just cause after five years, manumissions which have already
taken place, or which could be demanded, cannot be revoked; but twenty
*aurei *should be paid by each liberated slave to the party who gained
the suit.

\9. *Modestinus, On Inofficious Testaments*.

Where anyone institutes proceedings within five years, manumission will
not stand. Paulus says, however, that where freedom is granted under a
trust it will be allowed; and, of course, in this instance twenty
*aurei* must be paid by each individual.

\10. *Marcellus, Digest, Book III*.

Where, in the case of an inofficious testament, part of the judges
rendered a decision against it, and part in favor of it, which is
sometimes done; it will be more humane to adopt the opinion of those who
favored the testament, unless where it is clearly apparent that they
rendered an unjust decision in favor of the party who was appointed
heir.

\(1) It is a well known fact that anyone who accepts a legacy cannot
properly allege that the will is inofficious, unless he transferred the
entire legacy to another person.

\11. *Modestinus, Opinions, Book HI*.

I stated as my opinion that even where a party succeeds on the ground
that a testament is inofficious, any donations which the testator, while
living, seems to have made in favor of the appointed heir, are not for
that reason annulled; nor will an action lie to recover part of what was
given to him by way of dowry.

\12. *The Same, On Prescriptions, Book XII*.

It makes no difference whether a son who is disinherited accepts a
legacy bequeathed to him, or obtains it through his son or slave, to
whom it was left; in either instance he will be barred by an exception.
Again if his slave is appointed heir, and the son manumits him before he
directs him to enter upon the estate, so that he may do so of his own
free will, and the son does this with a fraudulent design, he will be
prevented from proceeding with his action.

\(1) Where a son who has been disinherited makes a demand upon a
*statuliber* for money due him, he is held to have accepted his father's
will.^1^

^1^ A *statuliber* was a slave whose freedom was in suspense and
generally dependent upon the fulfillment of some condition. In
consideration of the fact that he had the prospect of being liberated
from servitude, his condition was regarded as, to a certain extent,
superior to that of an ordinary bondman. To this class belonged captives
ransomed from the enemy, who were required to serve as slaves

\(2) Where a son brings suit to obtain a legacy which was revoked, and,
having failed, has recourse to a complaint for inofficiousness, he will
not be barred by an exception; although by the mere fact of his bringing
suit he approved of the will, still, some blame should be attributed to
the testator, so that the claim of the son cannot reasonably be
rejected.

\(3) Where the son of a testator, along with Titius, was a debtor for a
certain sum of money, and Titius was released by the terms of the will,
the son will not be discharged from liability on account of the release
of Titius; nor will his right to bring an action of inofficious
testament be barred.

\13. *Scævola, Opinions, Book HI*.

Titia appointed her daughter heir, left her son a legacy, and provided
by the same will that: "All those things which I have above directed to
be given or done, I wish to be given and done by any person who will
become my heir, or the possessor of my estate, even on intestacy. Also,
whatever I may direct hereafter to be given or done, I leave in trust to
the said person to see that it is given and done." The question arose
whether, if a sister gained a case in the Centumviral Court, the trust
must be executed in compliance with the preceding clause? My answer to
the inquiry whether a party can lawfully impose a trust on those whom he
thinks will succeed him on intestacy, either as heirs, or as possessors
of his estate, was that he could do so. Paulus states in a note that he
approves the opinion that trusts imposed by a party who dies intestate
need not be executed, as they would seem to have been ordered by a
person of unsound mind.

\14. *Papinianus, Questions, Book V*.

A father emancipated his son, and retained his grandson under his
control; the son subsequently had another son, and then died, after
having disinherited both sons, and omitted any mention of his own father
in his will. In an inquiry as to whether the will was inofficious or
not, the interest of the sons must take precedence, and the intentions
of the father of the deceased remains for consideration; but if judgment
is rendered against the sons, then the complaint of the father can be
examined, and he can institute proceedings.

\15. *The Same, Questions, Book XIV*.

For although parents have no right to succeed to the estate of their
children, still, on account of the wishes of the parents and their
natural

until the money paid for their release from captivity had been refunded
to those who had advanced it. Under the first Emperors, they could be
punished as slaves, but afterwards only the penalties to which freemen
were liable could be inflicted upon them. It has been suggested, with
considerable probability, that the *statuliber* was never actually
treated by the Romans as a slave.

This condition was recognized by the law of Louisiana. A slave of this
kind, from the time when he acquired the right of future freedom, could
take under a will, or by donation, but a curator was appointed to manage
his property. He could not be removed from the State. (Civil Code of
Louisiana, Arts. 37, 193, 194, 195.)  ED.

affection for their children, when the regular order of mortality is
disturbed, an estate ought to be left on the ground of affection no less
to parents than to children.

\(1) Where a party after having brought suit to declare a will
inofficious changes his mind, and then dies, a complaint on the ground
of inofficiousness will not be granted his heir, as it is not sufficient
for proceedings to be instituted if the plaintiff does not continue to
carry them on.

\(2) Where a son brings suit on the ground of an inofficious will
against two heirs, and obtains different decisions from the judges
defeating one heir and being defeated by the other, he can sue the
debtors of the estate, and he himself may be sued by the creditors to
the extent of his share in the same, and he can recover property and
divide the estate; for it is true that he is entitled to an action for
partition, as we think that he becomes an heir at law for a share of the
inheritance, and therefore a portion of it remains subject to the terms
of the will, and it does not seem absurd that the testator should be
considered to have died partly intestate.

\16. *The Same, Opinions, Book II*.

Where a son has already instituted proceedings on the ground of
inofficiousness of his mother's will, against his brother who was
appointed heir to a portion of the estate, and gains his case; a
daughter who did not bring suit, or did not succeed, cannot lawfully
share in the inheritance with her brother.

\(1) A father obtained possession of the estate of his son by the right
of manumission, in opposition to the provisions of the will, and look
possession of the property; and afterwards a daughter of the deceased,
whom he had disinherited, very properly prosecuted an action on the
ground that the will was inofficious, and then the possession which the
father obtained was annulled; for, in the former proceedings, the
question to be determined was the legal position of the father, and not
the legality of the will; and hence it was necessary for the entire
estate to be restored to the daughter together with the profits of the
same.

\17. *Paulus, Questions, Book II*.

Where anyone with the intention of rejecting the estate does not attack
a will as inofficious, the share to which he is entitled to does not
stand in the way of any others who may wish to institute proceedings for
that purpose. Wherefore, when one of two children who have been
disinherited institutes proceedings to have the will of their father
declared inofficious  for if the will is set aside, the other son will
have a right to the succession on the ground of intestacy, and therefore
cannot legally bring suit to recover the entire estate  if he should
gain his case, he can avail himself of the authority of *res judicata*,
since the *Centumviri*, when they declared the maker of the will
intestate would have believed that this is the only son living.

\(1) When judgment is rendered against a testament on the ground of
inofficiousness, the deceased is considered not to have been compe-

tent to make a will. This opinion is not to be approved where a decision
is rendered in favor of the plaintiff and the heir does not defend the
case; as, in this instance, it is not understood that the law is
established by the decree of the Court, and therefore manumissions are
sustained and actions can be brought for legacies.

\18. *The Same, On Inofficious Testaments*.

A Constitution of the Divine Brothers on this subject is extant, which
recognizes a distinction of this kind.

\19. *The Same, Questions, Book II*.

A mother, when about to die, appointed a stranger heir to three-fourths
of her estate, and one daughter an heir to one fourth of the same, and
passed over another daughter; whereupon the latter brought suit to
declare the will inofficious, and gained her case. I ask to what relief
the daughter who was appointed heir is entitled? I answered that the
daughter who was passed over should bring an action to recover whatever
she would have received if her mother had died intestate. Therefore, it
may be said that she who was passed over, even if she brings suit for
the entire estate on intestacy and succeeds, will be entitled to the
exclusive succession, just as if the other daughter had renounced her
lawful share. It should not be admitted, however, that the former may be
heard against her sister if she institutes proceedings on the ground of
inofficiousness.

\(1) Moreover, it must be said that the sister who entered upon the
estate in compliance with the provisions of the will, is not in the same
position as the one who was passed over, and therefore the latter must
bring suit to recover half of the estate from a stranger; and it may be
held that in this way she can recover half, because the entire half
belongs to her. According to this, the entire will is not set aside, but
the testatrix is rendered intestate to a certain extent, even if the
Court declares the will void as having been executed by a person who was
insane.

\(2) But if anyone should think that where a daughter gains her case the
entire will be rendered void, it must be held that the sister who was
appointed heir on intestacy can enter upon the estate, for since she
enters in compliance with the terms of the will, which she thought was
valid, she cannot be considered to have rejected her lawful share of the
estate, to which, indeed, she did not know that she was entitled; for
when persons are aware of their rights they do not lose them, if they
select a course which they believe they can pursue. This happens where a
patron, induced by an incorrect opinion, accepts the will of a deceased
freedman; for he is not held to have rejected the possession of the
estate in contravention of the will. From this it is evident that the
daughter who was passed over cannot legally bring suit to recover the
entire estate, since, if the will were set aside, the right of the one
appointed heir to enter upon the estate remains unimpaired.

\20. *Scævola, Questions, Book II*.

Where anyone wishes to have a will declared inofficious, although it may
be denied that he is the son of the deceased, he is not entitled to the
Carbonian possession of property, for this is only permitted where, if
the party were actually the son he would be the heir, or the legal
possessor of the estate; so that if, in the meantime, he should obtain
possession, and be supported, his rights would not be prejudiced by any
actions which might be brought by him. Where a party makes a claim of
inofficiousness, he cannot bring any actions except one to obtain the
estate, and he has no right to support. This is done to prevent him from
being in a better position than if his adversary had acknowledged him to
be the son of the testator.

\21. *Paulus, Opinions, Book HI*.

Where a party who instituted proceedings on the ground that a will was
inofficious, abandons the action, on account of fraudulent assertion of
the appointed heir, who alleges that he is tacitly bound to give him a
third part of the estate; he is not held to have renounced his right of
action, and therefore he cannot be prohibited from resuming the suit
which he began.

\(1) Inquiry has also been made whether an heir should be heard, when he
asks that what he has paid out before the action to declare the will
inofficious was brought, ought to be refunded to him? The answer was
that he who, being aware of the facts, paid out money in pursuance of a
trust with which he had no concern, will not, on this account, be
entitled to an action to recover it.

\(2) The same jurist gave it as his opinion that where the party who was
appointed heir is deprived of the estate by a suit to declare a will
inofficious, everything should proceed just as if the estate had not
been entered on; and therefore the appointed heir would have a complete
right of action against the party who gained the case, to collect any
debt, as well as a right of set-off against all indebtedness.

\22. *Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XVII*.

A son is not prevented from attacking the testament of his mother as
inofficious, where his father has received a legacy by the will of the
mother, or has entered upon the estate, even though the said son was
still under his father's control; and I have stated that the father is
not forbidden to attack the will in behalf of his son, for the indignity
is inflicted upon the latter.

\(1) It was also asked if the son failed in his attack on the will,
whether what was left to the father would be forfeited to the State?
For, as he would not be benefited by his success, and in this instance
the duty of the father was not in any way concerned, but everything
depended upon the merit of the son, we must incline to the opinion that
the father does not lose what was left to him, if a decision is rendered
in favor of the will.

\(2) Much more is this the fact where a testator left me a legacy, and
his son, after instituting proceedings on the ground that the will

was inofficious, died, leaving me his heir, and I still proceed with the
action against the estate, and I am defeated, I do not lose what was
left me by the will; if, of course, the deceased had already begun suit.
(3) Moreover, if I adopt a person after he has already brought an action
to declare the will inofficious, by which will a legacy had been
bequeathed to me, and I conduct the case in behalf of my adopted son,
and do not succeed; I should not lose my legacy because I have been
guilty of anything for which I ought to be deprived by the Treasury of
what was bequeathed to me; for I did not bring the suit in my own name,
but on account of a certain kind of legal succession.

\23. *Paulus, On Inofficious Testaments*.

If you suppose the case of an emancipated son who has been passed over
and his grandson who continued under the control of the testator, and is
appointed heir; the son can institute proceedings against his own son,
who is the grandson of the testator, for the possession of the estate,
but he cannot bring an action on the ground that the will is
inofficious. If, however, the emancipated son was disinherited, he can
bring the action, and can then be joined with his son, and will obtain
the estate along with him.

\(1) Where disinherited children have purchased an estate or any
property belonging to it from the persons who were appointed heirs,
knowing them to be such, or have rented land from them, or done anything
else like this, or have paid the heir debts which they owed the
testator, they are held to have accepted the will of the deceased, and
are excluded from bringing suit.

\(2) Where two sons are disinherited, and both bring suit on the ground
that the will is inofficious, and one of them afterwards concludes not
to proceed, his share will belong to the other by accretion. The same
rule applies where he is barred by lapse of time.

\24. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLVIII*.

It frequently occurs with reference to suits for inofficiousness that
different decisions are rendered in one and the same case. For what if
the brother who institutes proceedings and the appointed heirs are
persons occupying different legal positions? If this should be the case,
the deceased is held to have died partly testate and partly intestate.

\25. *The Same, Disputations, Book II*.

Where a donation is made not *mortis causa*, but *intervivos, *and at
all events with the understanding that it shall be included in the
fourth, it may be said that suit cannot be brought on the ground of
inofficiousness, if the party receives the fourth in the donation; or,
if he receives less, the amount lacking, shall be made up according to
the arbitration of some good citizen; or, under any circumstances, what
has been donated must be placed in the common fund.

\(1) Where a person who has no right to bring suit on the ground of an
inofficious will, is permitted to do so, and attempts to have the will
partially set aside, and selects some particular heir against whom

to bring the action; it must be said that as the will is partly valid,
and the parties who were entitled to preference over the plaintiff are
excluded, the latter has properly brought the suit.

\26. *The Same, Disputations, Book VIII*.

Where an heir has been appointed on a condition, for instance if he
should manumit Stichus, and he does manumit him, and afterwards the will
should be declared inofficious or unjust; it is but right in order that
he may obtain relief, that is to say, he should recover the value of the
slave from him after his manumission, to avoid his losing him
altogether.

\27. *The Same, Opinions, Book VI*.

If after a testament has been attacked as inofficious an agreement was
made by the parties to compromise the case, and the terms of the
compromise are not complied with by the heir, it is established that the
suit brought on the ground of inofficiousness still remains unaltered.

\(1) Where anyone alleges that he is the son of the testator who denied
this to be true in his will, and, nevertheless, disinherited him, ground
for an action for an inofficious will still remains.

\(2) A soldier cannot state that the will of another soldier is
inofficious.

\(3) Where a grandson instituted proceedings on the ground that a
certain part of a will was inofficious, against his paternal uncle or
some other person who was appointed heir, and gained the case, but the
testamentary heir appealed; it was decided, in the meantime, that on
account of the poverty of the minor, he should be granted an allowance
for maintenance in proportion to the assets of the estate, (for part of
which suit was brought by him in the attack on the will as inofficious)
and that his adversary would be required to supply him with necessaries
until the case was terminated.

\(4) A complaint can be filed on the ground of inofficiousness in the
case of the will of a mother who, thinking that her son was dead, had
appointed another heir.

\28. *Paulus, On the Jurisdiction of the Septemvirs*.

Where a mother has heard a false report that her son, who was a soldier,
was dead, and appointed other heirs by her will, the Divine Hadrian
decreed that the estate should belong to the son on the ground that
testamentary grants of freedom and bequests should be maintained. What
was added with reference to grants of freedom and bequests should
carefully be noted, for where a testament is decided to be inofficious,
nothing it contains is valid.

\29. *Ulpianus, Opinions, Book V*.

Where it is suspected by the legatees that collusion exists between the
appointed heirs and the person who is bringing suit against the will as
inofficious, it has been established that the legatees have a right

to appear and defend the will of the deceased, and they are also
permitted to appeal, if a judgment is rendered against the will.

\(1) Illegitimate children also can likewise object to the will of their
mother on the ground of inofficiousness.

\(2) When an attack on account of inofficiousness is made against a
will, although the case may be settled by compromise, the will still
remains in full force and effect; and therefore any testamentary grants
of freedom and bequests contained therein still continue to be valid to
the extent permitted by the *Lex Falcidia*.

\(3) Since a woman can never adopt a son without the consent of the
Emperor, no man can institute proceedings on the ground of
inofficiousness against the will of the woman whom he erroneously
thought to be his adoptive mother.

\(4) Proceedings on the ground that a will is inofficious must be
instituted in the province in which the testamentary heirs have their
residence.

\30. *Marcianus, Institutes, Book IV*.

A natural father can lawfully institute proceedings against the will of
his son who has been given in adoption, on the ground that said will is
inofficious.

\(1) The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that
guardians were permitted, in behalf of their wards, to institute
proceedings on the ground that a will was inofficious or forged, without
any risk of losing what was bequeathed to them by the will.

\31. *Paulus, On the Jurisdiction of the Septemvirs*.

Where a person who has a right to attack a will is unwilling, or cannot
do so, it is a matter for consideration whether he who is next in
succession shall be allowed to institute proceedings for that purpose;
and it has been established that he can, as succession is involved.

\(1) With reference to the action for inofficiousness brought by
children or parents, it makes no difference who may be appointed heir,
whether one of the children, a stranger, or a resident of the same town.

\(2) If I should become the heir of a party who himself was appointed
heir by the will which I wish to prove to be inofficious, this fact will
not bar me, especially if I do not have possession of the portion of the
estate in dispute, or only hold it in my own right.

\(3) We say that the case is different where a party left me the
property which he himself had received under the will; for if I accept
it I am excluded from attacking the will.

\(4) What must be said then if I should accept the will of the testator
in some other way; for example, if, after the death of my father, I
write on the will that I consent to it? In this instance I am prevented
from attacking it.

\32. *The Same, On Inofficious Testaments*.

Where a disinherited son acts as advocate, or assumes the duty of agent
for a party who brings an action for a legacy under the will, he

will not be permitted to attack the will; for he who approves of any
bequests of the deceased is held to have accepted his will.

\(1) Where a disinherited son becomes the heir of a legatee, and brings
an action for the legacy, let us consider whether he is not barred from
attacking the testament for the testament of the deceased is certain,
and, on the other hand, it is true that nothing has been left him by the
testament. He will be safer, however, if he abstains from bringing an
action for the legacy.^1^

TITLE III. CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR THE RECOVERY OF AN ESTATE.

\1. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

An estate may belong to us either by the ancient or by the recent law;
by the ancient law in accordance with the provisions of the Twelve
Tables, or by a testament legally executed:

\2. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

Whether we become heirs directly by our own acts, or by those of others;

\3. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

For instance, if we order some person who is under our control to accept
an estate to which he has been appointed heir. Where a person becomes
the heir of Titius, and he himself is the heir of Seius, it may be said
that, as he is the heir of Seius, so also he can claim the estate of
Titius. A party can become an heir on intestacy, as, for instance, where
he is the direct heir of the deceased, or an agnate, or where he
manumitted the deceased, or his father manumitted him.

Persons become heirs under the new law when they have a right to an
inheritance derived from decrees of the Senate, or from the
Constitutions of the Emperors.

\4. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book I*.

If I bring an action for the recovery of an estate against a party who
has possession of only that part of the same which is the subject

^1^ Inofficious testaments were unknown to the Common Law. A slight
analogy, however, exists between proceedings to set them aside and the
ancient English writ "*De rationabili parte bonorum";* by means of which
a widow could compel the executors of her husband to transfer to her the
third of his goods and chattels to which she and her children were
entitled, and which he was not permitted by law to alienate.

In this country, while a testator, generally speaking, has a right to
freely dispose of his property by will, this is, however, not the case
in Louisiana, where the inofficious testament is practically, if not
specifically forbidden by statutory provision. The Code gives the
following definition: "Those dispositions which fathers and mothers and
other ascendants make of their property to the prejudice of their
descendants, beyond the proportion reserved to them by law, are called
inofficious". (Civil Code of Louisiana, Arts. 1480, 1481, 1484, 1609,
1614, 3522.)  ED.

of controversy, he will be required to surrender everything of which he
subsequently obtains possession.

\5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIV*.

The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that the possessor of an estate
which was in dispute should be forbidden to dispose of any portion of it
before proceedings are instituted; unless he prefers to furnish security
for the entire amount of the estate, or for the restitution of the
property belonging thereto. The prætor, however, stated in an edict
that: "Where proper cause was shown he would permit a part of the
property to be alienated, even where such security was not given, but
only the customary undertaking after proceedings had been instituted;
lest, if the disposal of any of the property of an estate were
prevented, it might hinder, in some way or other, other advantageous
measures from being taken; as, for instance, if something was needed for
funeral expenses; (for he allows a diminution of the estate on account
of funeral expenses), and he will also do this when a pledge is to be
sold if a sum of money is not paid within a certain time.

A diminution of property belonging to an estate likewise becomes
necessary to provide food for the family, and the prætor must also
permit the sale of perishable articles which in a short time would be
destroyed.

\(1) The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript to Trebius Sergianus that
Ælius Asiaticus ought to give security for an estate, to recover; which
suit had been brought against him, and then he can allege that the will
is forged. This is done for the reason that the proceedings for recovery
may remain in abeyance while investigation of the allegation of forgery
is being made.

\(2) The authority of the action brought for the recovery of estates is
such that no other legal proceedings shall be permitted to prejudice it.

\6. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXV*.

Where a testament is alleged to be forged, and suit is brought for a
legacy under it, it must be paid after a bond has been filed, or an
inquiry must be instituted to determine whether it is due. Where the
testament is alleged to be forged, no legacy should be paid to the party
who attacks it on this ground, if the matter has been brought into
court.

\7. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XIV*.

Where anyone states that he is entitled to his freedom under the terms
of a will, the judge should not decide the question of his freedom, lest
he may prejudice some decree rendered with reference to the will; and
this law was passed by the Senate. The Divine Trajan stated in a
Rescript that the trial to determine his freedom must be postponed until
the suit on the ground of inofficiousness was either dismissed or
concluded.

\(1) Trials relating to freedom are, however, only stayed where joinder
of issue has taken place in a suit for inofficious testament, but

if this has not been done, the trial of the question of freedom shall
not be postponed. This the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript, for when a
certain Licinnianus had been brought into court to ascertain his status,
and, to prevent a too early decision as to what it was, he refused to
appear at the trial where the question of his freedom was to be heard,
saying that he would join issue on the inofficiousness of the testament,
and then bring an action to recover the estate; because he alleged that
both freedom and the estate were conferred upon him by the testament.

The Divine Pius said that if Licinnianus had been in possession of the
estate, he would have a better right to be heard, since he could then
have joined issue in behalf of the estate, and it was in the discretion
of the party claiming to be his master to proceed on the ground that the
testament was inofficious; but Licinnianus should not remain in slavery
for five years under the pretext of the inofficiousness of the will on
which point he himself had not joined issue.

In the end, the Emperor permitted the judge to determine generally
whether the trial with reference to the will was demanded in good faith,
and if he ascertained that it was, that a reasonable time should be
granted; and if issue had not been joined before it elapsed, the judge
should be ordered to perform his duties in the trial involving the
question of freedom.

\(2) The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that whenever anyone is
compelled to defend a case which involves his own freedom, and the
inheritance of an estate, but where he does not allege that he was made
free under the will, but in some other manner  as for instance, that he
had been manumitted by the testator in his lifetime  then the case
involving the question of freedom should not be delayed, even though it
was anticipated that an action would be brought with reference to the
will. He added plainly in the Rescript: "Provided the judge who was to
decide the question of freedom had been notified not to hear any
statements in favor of freedom which were based upon the testament".

\8. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

*A* person is not prohibited from bringing suit for the recovery of a
legal estate, because he carried out the intention of the deceased at a
time when he was ignorant whether the will was valid or not.

\9. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

It should be laid down as a regular rule that, "The only person liable
to an action for the recovery of an estate is he who has a right either
as heir or as possessor to a portion of the same."

\10. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*. No matter how small it
may be.

\(1) Therefore, where a party is the heir to an entire estate or to a
portion of the same, he alleges that the estate is his either wholly or
in part, but that only is delivered to him by order of court which his
adversary had possession of; that is the whole of it, if he is the heir
at all, or the share of the same to which he is entitled as heir.

\11. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

*A* person is in possession "as an heir" when he thinks himself to be
the heir. But, it may be asked, how is it with him who knows that he is
not the heir, and yet holds possession in that capacity? Arrianus, in
the Second Book On Interdicts, is of the opinion that he is liable; and
Proculus states that this is our practice, for it is held that a
possessor of the property of an estate is held to possess the same in
the capacity of heir.

\(1) A depredator, in fact, holds the estate "as possessor",

\12. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LXVII*.

Who, when he is asked why he is entitled to possession will answer,
"Because I am"; and will not contend that he is an heir, even by way of
false representation:

\13. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XV*.

Or anyone who cannot allege any right to possession; and therefore
thieves and robbers are liable to an action for the recovery of an
estate.

\(1) Again, this title "as possessor" is attached and, as it were,
joined to all other Titles. Hence it may be attached to the title of "as
purchaser"; for if I purchase from an insane person, knowing him to be
such, I hold the property "as possessor". Also with reference to the
title "as donee", the question arises whether the party holds as
possessor, for example, a wife or a husband; and we adopt the opinion of
Julianus that either of them holds the property in the capacity of
possessor, therefore he or she would be liable in a suit for the
recovery of the estate. Again, title "by right of dower" takes the form
of possession; as for instance, where I marry a girl under twenty years
of age and accept property as dowry, being aware of her age. Moreover,
if a legacy is paid to me on grounds which I know to be false, it is
certain that I hold the property "as possessor".

\(2) But he who delivers an estate under a trust cannot be held liable
in a suit for the recovery of the same, unless he acted fraudulently;
that is to say, if he knew that it ought not to be delivered, and,
nevertheless, surrendered it; for even fraud previously committed is to
be considered in a suit for the recovery of an estate, since the party
fraudulently relinquished possession.

\(3) Neratius, in the Sixth Book of Parchments, says that a suit for the
recovery of an estate can be brought against an heir, even where he did
not know that the deceased held the estate in the capacity of either
heir or possessor. He states in the Seventh Book that the same rule
applies even where the heir thought that the property claimed belonged
to some estate to which he was entitled.

\(4) How would it be if a person had purchased an estate? Should a
prætorian action for the recovery of the estate be granted against him
to prevent him being annoyed by separate suits? It is certain that the
vendor is liable. But suppose no vendor appears, or he disposes of the
property for a small amount of money, and was a *bona-fide* posses-

sor; can recourse be had to the purchaser? Gaius Cassius thinks that a
prætorian action should be granted.

\(5) The same rule must be considered to apply where an heir, having
been directed to sell the estate for a small sum, disposed of it to
Titius. Papinianus thinks that it should be held that an action could be
granted against the beneficiary of the trust, as it is not expedient for
suit to be brought against the heir where he has received an
insignificant sum.

\(6) The same rule will apply where the heir was asked to surrender the
estate after retaining a certain amount. It is evident that if, after
having received a certain amount, he was asked to surrender the
remainder, that suit for recovery cannot be brought against him; (and
this is the opinion held by Papinianus) since what the heir received in
order to fulfill a condition is not possessed by him. Sabinus, however,
holds differently in the case of a slave who is to be free
conditionally, and this is the better opinion, because the money belongs
to the estate.

\(7) This rule is applicable where a party only retains the profits of
the estate, and he also is liable to an action for recovery of the
estate.

\(8) Where anyone knowingly purchases an estate which belongs to
another, he holds the same as possessor, some authorities think that an
action for recovery may be brought against him; but I do not believe
that this opinion is correct, for no one is a depredator who pays a
price, still, being a purchaser of the entire estate, he is liable to a
prætorian action.

\(9) Moreover, where anyone purchases an estate from the Treasury with
the understanding that it has no owner; it is perfectly right that a
prætorian action should be granted against him.

\(10) It is stated by Marcellus in the Fourth Book of the Digest, that
where a woman gives an estate by way of dowry, the husband is in
possession of the same by right of dowry, but is liable to a prætorian
action for its recovery. Marcellus, however, says that the woman herself
is liable to a direct action, especially if a divorce has already taken
place.

\(11) It is also established that the heir to property which the
deceased possessed as purchaser is liable to an action for the recovery
of the same, for the reason that the heir holds possession "as heir",
although he is also liable to a suit for property which the deceased
possessed, either in the capacity of heir or in that of possessor.

\(12) Where anyone is in possession of an estate in behalf of a person
who is absent, and it is uncertain whether the latter will ratify his
acts or not; I think that suit for recovery can be brought in behalf of
the party who is absent, but certainly not on his own account; because a
man is not deemed to be in possession "as heir", or merely "as
possessor", who holds property as the representative of another; unless
someone should say that, as the principal did not ratify his acts, the
agent is, to a certain extent, a depredator, for then he can be held
liable on his own account.

\(13) The action for the recovery of an estate can be brought not only
against the person who possesses property which belongs to the estate,
but even if he possesses nothing; and it should be considered if where
he possesses nothing, and offers to defend the suit himself, whether he
does not render himself liable. Celsus states in the Fourth Book of the
Digest, that he is liable on the ground of fraud; for anyone who,
himself, offers to defend a suit of this kind acts fraudulently. This
opinion is generally approved by Marcellus in his comments on Julianus,
for he says that every one who volunteers to defend a suit for the
recovery of an estate is liable just as if he were in possession of the
same.

\(14) Moreover, when anyone is guilty of fraud to avoid being in
possession, he will be liable to an action for the recovery of an
estate. Where, however, I lose possession through fraud, and another
obtains it and is ready to defend an action, Marcellus in the Fourth
Book of the Digest discusses the point as to whether the right to
damages is not extinguished as against a party who has ceased to be in
possession; and he also says that it is extinguished unless the
plaintiff has an interest in a contrary decision. He states positively
that if the party is prepared to surrender the property, the right of
action for damages is undoubtedly extinguished; but if he who
relinquishes possession fraudulently is sued before the other, the
possessor will not be released from liability.

\(15) The action for the recovery of an estate can also be brought
against a debtor to the same, on the principle that he is the possessor
of a right; and it is established that suit can be brought for the
recovery of an estate against the possessor of a right.

\14. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

It makes no difference whether the person is a debtor on account of some
offence which he has committed, or by reason of a contract. The term
"debtor to an estate" is understood to include a person who incurred
some liability to a slave belonging to the estate, or one who did some
damage to it before it was entered upon,

\15. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*. Or someone who stole
something from the estate.

\16. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

Where, however, the person against whom suit is brought for recovery of
the estate is a debtor for a sum to be paid within a certain time, and
under some condition, judgment should not be rendered against him. It is
clear that the time when judgment is rendered should be considered by
the court in determining whether the day for payment has arrived,
according to the opinion of Octavenus as stated by Pomponius; which
would also be the case in a conditional stipulation. If, however, the
day of payment has not arrived, the defendant should by order of the
judge make provision for the payment of the debt at the proper time, or
when the condition is fulfilled.

\(1) He also who is in possession of the price of property belonging to
the estate, or who has collected a claim from a debtor to the estate, is
liable in an action for the recovery of the estate.

\(2) Wherefore, Julianus states in the Sixth Book of the Digest, an
action for the recovery of an estate can be brought against a party who
also claims it, and who has collected damages in a suit.

\(3) An action for the recovery of an estate can be brought not only
against a debtor of the deceased, but also against a debtor to the
estate. It is held by both Celsus and Julianus that it can be brought by
anyone who transacted the business of the estate; but where the party
transacted business for the heir, this cannot be done, for no action for
the recovery of an estate can be brought by anyone indebted to the heir.

\(4) Julianus states that if a person who is in possession as heir is
forcibly ejected, suit can be brought by him as the possessor of a right
against the estate; for the reason that he is entitled to the interdict
*Unde vi*, which he must assign if he is defeated; but the party who
ejected him is also liable to a suit for recovery, because he is in
possession "as possessor" of the property belonging to the estate.

\(5) Julianus further says that where anyone sells property belonging to
an estate, whether he is in possession, or whether he has received the
purchase money or not, or has a right to bring suit for the same, he is,
in this case also, required to assign his rights of action.

\(6) He also says that a patron cannot bring suit for an estate against
a party to whom his freedman fraudulently made a transfer, because he is
liable to the Calvisian Action, at the instance of the said patron, as
he is the debtor of the latter, and not the debtor of the estate.
Therefore, no suit for the recovery of an estate will lie against one to
whom a donation was made *mortis causa*.

\(7) Julianus always says that where anyone transfers an estate, or
delivers certain articles belonging to the same, in compliance with a
trust, suit can be brought against him for recovery; because he has a
right to bring a personal action to recover property transferred for
that reason, and he is, as it were, the possessor of a right. He also
states that where he has paid out the purchase-money of articles which
he sold in pursuance of the trust, suit for recovery of the estate can
be brought against him, because he himself can recover the money. In
such instances, however, the heir must only assign his rights of action;
since the property is in existence, and the claimant can also recover it
by an action *in rem*.

\17. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

If the possessor of an estate should pay legacies with his own money,
for the reason that he thought that he was the heir under the will, and
anyone deprives him of the estate on the ground of intestacy  although
it may be held that the possessor is damaged, because he did not provide
for himself by making a stipulation that if the estate was acquired by
some other person, the legacies should be returned to him  still, as it
might happen that he paid the legacies at a time when there was no
controversy as to the ownership of the estate, and for

that reason he failed to obtain security, it is established in a case of
this kind that if he loses the estate, an action for the recovery of
what he paid should be granted him.

But where no security was given, and such an action is granted, there is
danger that he cannot recover anything on account of the poverty of the
party to whom the legacy was paid; and, therefore, according to a decree
of the Senate, he is entitled to relief, and can pay himself by
retaining property belonging to the estate; but he must assign his
rights of action to the plaintiff so that he may institute proceedings
at his own risk.

\18. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

It should also be considered, when the possessor of an estate makes a
sale through a broker, and the latter loses the money, whether he is
liable to a suit for recovery, since he has nothing and can obtain
nothing? Labeo thinks that he is liable, becauses he injudiciously
trusted the broker at his own risk. Octavenus, however, says that he
must assign nothing but his rights of action, for he is liable to a suit
to recover these rights. It seems to me that the opinion of Labeo is
correct in the case of a party who holds possession in bad faith, but
that that of Octavenus is the one to be adopted where the possessor is a
*bona-fide* one.

\(1) Where an action is brought against a party for the recovery of an
estate, who is not at the time the possessor of either the property, or
of any right, but who subsequently obtained possession of either, can he
be held liable to such an action? Celsus, in the Fourth Book of the
Digest, states very properly that a decision should be rendered against
him, even though in the beginning he had nothing in his possession.

\(2) Now let us consider what things are included in the suit for the
recovery of an estate. It is held that a suit of this kind includes all
the assets belonging to an estate, whether they consist of rights or
tangible property.

\19. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

And, indeed, it embraces not only tangible property belonging to the
estate, but also such as does not form part of it, but which is
nevertheless at the risk of the heir; as for instance, articles given in
pledge to the deceased, or loaned to him, or deposited with him. In
fact, as to articles left in pledge, there is a special action for their
recovery, even though they are included in the suit for the estate, like
those articles which are the object of the Publician Action.^1^ But
although an action cannot readily be brought with reference to articles
which have been

^1^ This action was one *in rem*, and lay where the legal possession had
been lost before the right of ownership had been perfected by lapse of
time, and applied not only to tangible property but also to services,
usufructs, and even to things not subject to usucaption. The Court
protected the possessor against all other persons until the alleged
owner had proved his superior title to the article or right in dispute.
 ED.

loaned or deposited, it is still just that they should be restored,
because parties are subject to risk on their account.

\(1) But where the term requisite to acquire ownership by usucaption, as
purchaser, has been completed by the heir, that is to say, the
plaintiff, the property will not be included in the suit for recovery of
the estate, nor will any exception be granted the possessor.

\(2) Those articles also are included in the suit for recovery of an
estate which the possessor has a right to retain, though not the right
of action to recover them; for example, where the deceased had sworn
that the property did not belong to the plaintiff, and then died, this
must also be restored. Nay more, where the possessor of property lost it
through his own fault, he will be liable on this account. The same rule
will apply to the case of a depredator, although he is not liable on the
ground of negligence, because he ought not to retain the property.

\(3) I have stated that servitudes are not included in the restitution
of property belonging to an estate, since there is nothing to be
restored under that head, as in the case of material things and their
profits; but if the owner of the land does not permit the other party to
pass through without hindrance, a suitable action can be brought against
him.

\20. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

Those things also which were acquired on account of the estate are also
embraced in a suit for its recovery; as for instance, slaves, cattle,
and anything else which was necessarily obtained for the benefit of the
estate. Where, indeed, these were purchased with money belonging to the
estate, they are undoubtedly included therein. But if the money was not
a part of the estate, it should be considered whether this is the case;
and I think that they ought to be included if they were of great
advantage to the estate, and the heir must by all means return the price
paid for them.

\(1) Everything purchased with money belonging to an estate is not,
however, to be included in an action for its recovery. For Julianus says
in the Sixth Book of the Digest, that if the possessor purchased a slave
with money belonging to the estate, and suit is brought against him for
its recovery, the slave will only be included in the assets of the
estate if it was to the interest of the same that he should be
purchased; but if the possessor bought him for his own use, then the
price paid for him must be included.

\(2) In like manner, if the possessor sold land belonging to the estate
without any good reason, not only the land, but its crops as well, shall
be included in a suit to recover the estate; but if he did this for the
purpose of paying a debt due from the estate, nothing else shall be
included but the price which was paid.

\(3) Again, not only the property which was in existence at the time of
death, but also that which was afterwards added to the estate, are to be
included in the action for its recovery; for an estate admits of both
the increase and diminution of its assets. I am of the opinion that
whatever is added to an estate after it has been entered upon,  if, in
fact, it is derived from the estate itself  should form part of the
same;

but if it is derived from some other source it does not, because such
property belonged to the possessor in person. All crops also constitute
an increase of the estate, whether they have been obtained before, or
after entry upon the same, and the offspring of female slaves
unquestionably increases the amount of an estate.

\(4) As we have previously mentioned that all rights of action belonging
to an estate can be included in a suit brought for its recovery, the
question arises whether they bring their proper character with them or
not; for example, where the amount of damages in an action is increased
by the denial of the defendant, does such an action include the said
increase, or is it only brought for simple damages, as under the *Lex
Aquilia*? Julianus says in the Sixth Book of the Digest, that liability
exists only for simple damages.

\(5) The same authority very properly holds that where the possessor has
had judgment rendered against him in a noxal action in favor of the
deceased, he cannot be released by a surrender of whatever caused the
damage; because a defendant only has the right of surrendering the
property for that purpose, until suit has been brought against him to
enforce the judgment; but after it has been brought, he cannot liberate
himself by a surrender of this kind; and, indeed, such a proceeding has
been brought against him in this instance by filing a petition for the
recovery of the estate.

\(6) In addition to these points, we find many others discussed with
reference to suits for the recovery of estates; to the sale of property
belonging to deceased persons; to fraud which has been committed; and to
profits. As, however, a rule was established by a decree of the Senate,
the best course will be to give the contents of the decree itself in its
own words and then interpret it: "On the day before the *Ides* of March
Quintus Julius Balbus and Publius Juventius Celsus, Titius Aufidius and
Oenus Severianus, being Consuls, made statements with reference to those
questions which the Emperor Cæsar, the son of Trajanus Parthicus,
grandson of the Divine Nerva, Hadrianus Augustus, the greatest of
sovereigns, proposed and included in a written communication on the
fifth day of the Nones of March what he wished to be done, and thereupon
they passed the following resolutions: Whereas, before suit was brought
by the Treasury for a certain part of the property of Rusticus forfeited
to the State, those who thinking that they were heirs of said estate
sold the same; We decree that interest ought not to be charged on the
price of the property sold, and the same rule must be observed in
similar cases. Moreover, We decree that where judgment is rendered
against parties who have been sued for the recovery of an estate, the
price of any property belonging to said estate must be refunded by them,
even if such property was destroyed or depreciated in value before the
action for recovery was brought. Moreover, if any parties have taken
possession of the property of an estate when they knew that it did not
belong to them, even though this was done before issue was joined, in
order to avoid being in possession of the same, judgment shall be
rendered against them just as if they had been in possession of said
property; but where they had

good reason to believe that they were entitled to the said property,
they shall only be liable to the extent to which they profited by their
act.

"It was the opinion of the Senate that the action for recovery of the
estate must be considered to have been brought by the Treasury as soon
as the party knew that he had been sued; that is to say, as soon as he
was notified or summoned either by a letter or by a citation."

We must now give the proper interpretation of the separate terms of the
decree of the Senate.

\(7) The Senate says, "Before suit was brought by the Treasury for a
certain part of the property forfeited to the State". What occurred was
that the Treasury brought suit for a certain forfeited portion of an
estate, but if the whole of it had been claimed, the Decree of the
Senate would likewise be applicable; and where an action was brought by
the Treasury for unclaimed property or goods to which it was entitled
for any other good reason, the same rule would apply.

\(8) The same decree of the Senate will apply where an action is brought
by a municipality.

\(9) Where a private party brings an action, no one doubts that the
decree of the Senate will also apply, although it is made on account of
a public matter.

\(10) Not only do we make use of this decree of the Senate in questions
relating to estates, but also in those having reference to the *peculium
castrense*, or any other aggregate of property.

\(11) With reference to the clause, "The action for the recovery of the
estate must be considered to have been brought as soon as," etc., this
signifies as soon as the party knows that the estate is demanded of him,
because as soon as he learns of this he immediately becomes a possessor
in bad faith, that is "As soon as he was notified". What would be the
case, however, if he was aware of the fact, and still nobody notified
him? Will he become liable to refund the interest on money received for
the sale of property? I think that he will, for he then becomes a
possessor in bad faith. But let us suppose that he has been notified,
but was not aware of it, because the notice was served, not on himself
but on his agent? The Senate requires that he himself should be
notified; and therefore he will not be affected unless the party to whom
notice was given informs him; but where the agent was able to do so, and
did not, he will not be liable. The Senate did not state by whom the
party must be notified, and therefore whoever does it will render him
whom he notified liable.

\(12) These things have reference to *bona-fide* possessors, for the
Senate mentioned those, "Who, thinking that they were heirs"; but where
a party sells an estate which he knows does not belong to him, then,
beyond question, not only the purchase-money of the property but also
the property itself and the profits of the same, are included in the
suit for recovery. However, the Emperor Severus in an Epistle to Celer
seems to have applied this rule to possessors in bad faith also;
although the Senate only mentioned those who thought themselves to be
heirs; unless we refer the words to such articles as it was expedient to
sell because they were a burden, rather than a benefit to the estate, so

that it might be in the discretion of the plaintiff to select what
account he could render against the possessor in bad faith; whether he
would demand of him the property and the profits thereof, or the
purchase-money and interest, after proceedings had been instituted.

\(13) Although the Senate mentions those who think that they are heirs,
still, if they consider themselves to be the possessors of the property
or any other lawful possessors, or the estate has been delivered to
them, they will occupy the same position.

\(14) Papinianus states in the Third Book of Questions, that if the
possessor of an estate does not handle money found among the assets of
the same, a suit for interest can, under no circumstances, be brought
against him.

\(15) The decree of the Senate says, "On the purchase money received for
the property sold". We must understand by "purchase-money received", not
only that which was already obtained, but also that which might have
been obtained, but was not.

\(16) What must be done if the possessor sold property after a suit for
recovery of the estate had been brought? Then the property itself and
the profits of the same will be included. If, however, the property
should be of such a nature as to be unproductive, or liable to be
destroyed by lapse of time, and it was sold at its true value, perhaps
the plaintiff may choose to have the purchase-money and the interest of
the same.

\(17) The Senate says it is decreed that, "Where suit is brought against
any persons for the recovery of an estate, and judgment is rendered
against them, the purchase-money which they received for the sale of
property belonging to said estate must be surrendered by them; even
though such property may have been destroyed, or diminished in value
before the suit was brought". Where a *bona-fide* possessor sells the
property of an estate, whether he received the purchase-money or not, he
must return the price, because he has a right of action; but where he
has a right of action, it will be sufficient if he assigns that right.

\(18) But where he sold property, and paid over what he received for it
to the true owner on a judgment for the same, it is not held to have
come into his hands; even if it might be said that, in the beginning,
the purchase-money was not included in the suit, because what was sold
did not form part of the estate. But although the Senate made mention
not of property which belonged to the estate but of articles included in
it, he will not be compelled to make restitution, since nothing remains
in his hands. Julianus states in the Sixth Book of the Digest, that a
party will not be required to make restitution of what he collected
which he actually does not owe; nor will he be entitled to credit for
money which he paid which was not due.

\(19) But where property has been returned, then it is certainly a part
of the estate, and the price of the same which was refunded will not be
included in a suit for recovery of the estate.

\(20) Where the possessor of an estate is liable to the purchaser by
reason of the sale, it must be held that he is protected by the
security.

\(21) The possessor must pay over the purchase-money, whether the
property is destroyed, or diminished in value. But, is he bound to
refund it without distinction, if he is the possessor in good faith, or
even in bad faith? If the property is still in existence and in the
possession of the purchaser, and is not destroyed or deteriorated; then,
undoubtedly a possessor in bad faith must deliver the actual property,
or, if he is absolutely unable to recover it from the purchaser, he must
pay as much as the property is sworn to be worth in court. Where,
however, the property is lost or deteriorated, the real value must be
paid, because if the plaintiff had secured the property, he might have
sold it, and could not have lost its real value.

\21. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

Property is understood to be destroyed, when it has ceased to exist; and
lost, when the title to it has been acquired by usucaption, and, on this
account, it has been removed from the assets of the estate.

\22. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

Where a *bona-fide* possessor has obtained both the property and the
purchase-money for the same; for example, because he purchased the
identical thing, should he be heard if he prefers to surrender the
property and not the purchase-money? We hold that in the case of a
depredator, the plaintiff should have his choice; but, in this instance,
the possessor has a better right to be heard, if he wishes to deliver
the property itself, even though it may be deteriorated; but if the
plaintiff wishes to have the purchase-money, he should not be heard,
because a desire of this kind is an impudent one; or shall we consider
that, since the purchaser has been enriched by property included in the
estate, he should surrender it with the excess of the purchase-money
over and above its present value? In an Address of the Divine Hadrian
the following appears: "Conscript Fathers examine whether it is more
equitable that the possessor should not obtain a profit, but should
surrender the purchase money which he received for the sale of property
belonging to another, as it may be decided that the purchase-money takes
the place of the property of the estate which was sold, and, to a
certain extent, becomes a portion of the assets of said estate".

Therefore the possessor is required to surrender to the plaintiff not
only the property itself but also the profit which he obtained by the
sale of the same.

\23. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

It should be considered whether a *bona-fide* possessor is required to
surrender all the purchase-money, or whether he must do so only in cases
where he was enriched by it; suppose, for example, that after having
received it he either lost it, expended it, or gave it away. The clause,
"Came into his hands", is one of doubtful significance, whether it only
applies to what there was in the beginning, or to what remains; and I
think that the next clause in the decree of the Senate is also
ambiguous, and that no claim can be made except where the party is
pecuniarily benefited.

\(1) Hence, if what comes into his hands is not only the purchase-money,
but also a penalty incurred on account of delayed payment; it may be
held that this also was included, because the party was enriched to that
entire amount, although the Senate only mentioned the purchase-money.

\24. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

Where the possessor is forcibly ejected, he is not obliged to give up a
penalty incurred, because the plaintiff has no right to the same.
Neither is he required to surrender a penalty which his adversary
promised him if he should not be present at the trial.

\25. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

Moreover, if he sold part of the estate under a conditional agreement it
must be stated that the same rule applies, and he must surrender the
profit which he obtained under such conditions.

\(1) Again, if he sold property and bought other property with the
purchase-money, the latter will be included in a suit for the recovery
of the estate; but not the property which he added to his own
possessions. But, where the property purchased was of less value than
what is paid for it, he will be considered to have become enriched to
the amount only of the value of said property, just as, if he had used
it up, he would not be considered to have been enriched to its full
value.

\(2) When the Senate says: "Where parties have taken possession of
property which they know does not belong to them, even though they did
this before issue was joined, in order to avoid being in possession of
the same; judgment shall be rendered against them, just as if they were
in possession"; this is to be understood to mean that fraud which has
been committed, as well as negligence, may be alleged in the action for
the recovery of the estate; and therefore suit can be brought against a
party who did not collect a debt of the estate from another, or even
from himself, if he was released by lapse of time, that is, if he was
able to collect the debt.

\(3) As to what the Senate says, namely, "Where they have taken
possession of property", reference is here made to plunderers, that is
to say, those who know that the estate does not belong to them and
appropriate its assets; at all events, where they have no good reason
for taking possession of the same.

\(4) So far as profits are concerned, however, the Decree states that
they will have to surrender not only what they obtained, but also what
they ought to have obtained.

\(5) In this instance the Senate refers to a party who has appropriated
property belonging to an estate for the purpose of plundering it. Where,
however, in the beginning, he had good cause for taking possession, and
afterwards having become aware that none of the estate belonged to him,
acted in a predatory manner, the Senate does not seem to refer to him;
still, I am of the opinion that the intention of the Decree also has
reference to him; for it makes little difference whether a man conducted
himself fraudulently in connection with an estate in the beginning, or
began to do so subsequently.

\(6) With regard to the clause, "Who knows that the property does not
belong to them"; shall this be considered to apply to one who is aware
of the facts, or to one who made a mistake with reference to the law?
For he may have thought that a will was properly executed, when it was
void; or that he was entitled to the estate rather than some other
agnate who had preceded him. I do not think that anyone should be
classed as a plunderer who lacks fraudulent intent, even though he may
be mistaken with reference to the law.

\(7) The Decree says, "Even though they should do this before issue was
joined"; and this has been added for the reason that, after issue has
been joined, all possessors are held to be liable for bad faith; and,
indeed, this is the case after proceedings have been instituted.
Although mention is made of joinder of issue in the Decree of the
Senate, still, as soon as proceedings have been begun, all possessors
are on the same footing, and are liable as plunderers, and we make use
of this rule at the present time. Hence, as soon as the party is called
to account, he becomes aware that the property of which he is in
possession does not belong to him; and, indeed, where a man is a
plunderer, he will be held liable on the ground of fraud before issue is
joined, for this would be a species of fraud which has already been
committed.

\(8) "Therefore", it is further stated in the Decree, "judgment should
be rendered against them just as if they were in possession". This is
reasonable, for a party who acts fraudulently in order to avoid being in
possession should have judgment rendered against him, just as if he were
the actual possessor; which is to be understood to mean whether he
fraudulently relinquishes possession, or with fraudulent intent refuses
to take possession. This clause will apply whether the property is in
possession of another or has absolutely ceased to exist; wherefore, if
some one else is the possessor, suit for the recovery of the estate can
be brought against either party, and where possession has passed through
several persons all of them will be liable.

\(9) Shall he alone who is in possession be liable for the profits, or
will he also be liable who acted fraudulently to avoid being in
possession? It must be said, after the Decree of the Senate, that both
are liable.

\(10) These words of the Decree permit an oath to be administered, even
against the party who is not in possession; as he who acted fraudulently
to avoid being in possession may swear to the amount in court, just as
the defendant can do who is in possession.

\(11) The Senate attempted to favor *bona-fide* possessors, in order to
prevent them from being subjected to loss of the full amount, and only
to be held liable to the extent to which they became enriched;
therefore, whatever expense they caused the estate, either by wasting or
losing any of the property, if they thought that they were squandering
what belonged to themselves, they will not be compelled to make
restitution; nor where they have given anything away, will they be
considered to have become more wealthy, although they may have placed
some one under a natural obligation to remunerate them. It is clear that
if they have accepted any recompense in return, it must be

held that they are enriched to the amount of what they received; as this
would be a certain kind of exchange.

\(12) Where anyone makes use of his property in a more lavish manner on
account of his being entitled to an estate, Marcellus thinks, in the
Fifth Book of the Digest, that he will not be entitled to any deduction
from the estate if he has not used any of it.

\(13) In like manner, if he borrowed money as though he were rich and
deceived himself, the same principle will apply.

\(14) Where, however, he pledged some of the assets of the estate,
should it be considered whether he has used any of said assets? This is
a difficult question to answer, as he himself is liable.

\(15) To such an extent is it true that a person is not held liable who
is not enriched, that if anyone, being under the impression that he is
the sole heir, wastes half of an estate without fraudulent intent,
Marcellus, in treating this point in the Fourth Book of the Digest, asks
whether he is liable; since what he appropriated was derived from
property that did not belong to him, but to his co-heirs; for if a man
who is not an heir wastes everything under his control, he will
undoubtedly not be liable, since he was not enriched.

In the question proposed, however, there are three opinions involved;
one the first mentioned; next, the second, namely, that it might be said
that he is obliged to surrender all the assets that remain, since he had
squandered his own share; and third, that what was wasted should be
charged to both; and he says that something should certainly be given
up, but he doubts whether restitution for all or only a part should be
made. It is my opinion, however, that the entire balance should not be
given up, but only half of the same.

\(16) Where anyone has expended part of an estate must it lose all, or
will a proportion of the loss be taken out of his patrimony? As, for
example, where he drank up the entire supply of wine belonging to the
estate; must the estate bear all the expense, or will some of it be
charged to his patrimony? This would be on the supposition that he Was
deemed to be more wealthy to the amount that he was in the habit of
expending for wine before he received the inheritance; so that, if he
was more lavish in his expenditure on account of the inheritance, he
would not be considered to become more wealthy to the amount of the
excess, but he would be held to have become enriched so far as his
regular outlay was concerned; since, if that were true, he would not
have incurred such great expense; nevertheless, he would have spent
something for his daily subsistence.

The Divine Marcus, in the case of a certain Pythodorus, who had been
asked to give up as much of the estate as remained under his control,
decreed that what had been alienated without the intention of
diminishing the trust, and the price of which had not increased the
private property of Pythodorus, should be returned, and should be
charged to the private property of Pythodorus and the estate, and not
the estate alone. Therefore, it must be considered whether, in
accordance with the Rescript of the Divine Marcus, the ordinary expenses
should be taken out of the estate, or out of the private property of the

aforesaid party; and the better opinion is that the expenses which he
would have incurred, if he had not been the heir, must be paid out of
his own estate.

\(17) Moreover, if the *bona-fide* possessor sold property of the estate
and did not become more wealthy by the purchase-money, has the plaintiff
a right to recover certain articles from the purchaser, if he has not
yet acquired the title to them through usucaption? And, if he brings
suit for their recovery, may he not be barred by this exception; ("As
the estate should not be prejudiced by any question arising between the
plaintiff and the party who made the sale, on the ground that the price
of said property is not held to be included in the action brought for
the recovery of an estate"), and even if the purchaser loses his case,
has he a right for reimbursement from the party who made the sale? I am
of the opinion that the property can be recovered, unless the purchaser
can have recourse to the *bona-fide* possessor. But what if the party
who made the sale is prepared to set up a defence, in order to permit
himself to be sued, just as if he were in possession? In this instance
an exception would apply on the part of the purchaser. It is certain
that if the property was sold for a low price and the plaintiff recovers
it, no matter what the amount was, then much more may it be said that he
will be barred by an exception. For if the possessor collects anything
from the debtors of the estate, and pays the money to the plaintiff,
Julianus says in the Fourth Book of the Digest, that the said debtors
are released from liability, whether the party who collected the debts
from them was a *bona-fide* possessor or a plunderer, and that they are
discharged by operation of law.

\(18) A suit for the recovery of an estate, although it is in an action
*in rem*, still includes some personal obligations; as, for example, the
payment of funds received from debtors, as well as the purchase money of
property which has been sold.

\(19) This Decree of the Senate though it was passed to facilitate
proceedings for the recovery of an estate, it is well settled also
applies to a suit in partition; otherwise, the absurd principle would be
established that an action might be brought for the recovery of
property, but not for the purpose of its division.

\(20) The young of flocks and cattle form part of the increase of an
estate.

\26. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

And if lambs are born, and afterwards others are born of these, the
latter must also be given up as an increase of the estate.

\27. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

The issue of female slaves and the offspring of their female children
are not considered to be profits, because it is not customary for female
slaves to be acquired for breeding purposes; their offspring are,
nevertheless, an increase of the estate; and since all these form part
of the estate, there is no doubt that the possessor should surrender
them, whether he is the actual possessor, or, after suit was brought, he
acted fraudulently to avoid being in possession.

\(1) Moreover, rents which have been collected from persons who leased
buildings, are included in the action; even though they may have been
collected from a brothel, for brothels are kept on the premises of many
reputable persons.

\28. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

For, according to the Decree of the Senate, it must be held that every
species of profit should be included, whether it is obtained from a
*bona-fide* possessor or from a depredator.

\29. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

It is evident that any payments received from testaments are to be
considered as profits. Compensation for the labor of slaves is in the
same class as rents, as well as payment made for transportation by ships
and beasts of burden.

\30. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

Julianus states that a plaintiff ought to elect whether he will demand
merely the principal or the interest as well, taking an assignment of
the rights of action at his own risk. But, according to this, we shall
not observe what the Senate intended should occur, which was that a
*bona-fide *possessor should be liable to the amount by which he was
enriched; and what would be the case if the plaintiff should elect to
take money which the defendant had been unable to retain? It must be
said therefore with reference to a *bona-fide* possessor, that he is
only obliged to pay either the principal and interest on the same, if he
received any, or assign his right of action for whatever is still due to
him under it; but of course, at the risk of the plaintiff.

\31. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

If the possessor has paid any creditors, he will have a right to include
these payments, even though he did not actually release the party who
brought the action for recovery; for where anyone makes a payment in his
own name, and not in behalf of the debtor, he does not release the
debtor. Hence, Julianus says in the Sixth Book of the Digest, that the
possessor can, under such circumstances, only be credited where he gives
security that he will defend the plaintiff against the creditors. But
whether a *bona-fide* possessor is obliged to give security that the
plaintiff shall be defended, should be considered, because he does not
seem to have been enriched by the payments which he made; unless he may
have had a right of action to recover them, and in this respect he
appears to be enriched, because he can bring suit to recover the money;
for example, where he thinks that he is the heir, and paid what was due
on his own account. Julianus appears to me to have been thinking only of
a plunderer who ought to give security, and not of a *bona-fide*
possessor; the latter, however, must assign his right of action. Where
the plaintiff is sued by the creditors, he should make use of an
exception.

\(1) Where anything was owing to the plunderer himself, he should not
deduct it; especially if it was a debt due through a natural obliga-

tion. But what if the plaintiff was benefited by the debt being paid,
because it was incurred with a penalty, or for some other reason? In
this instance it may be stated that he has paid himself, or should have
done so.

\(2) A lawful possessor undoubtedly ought to deduct what is due to him.

\(3) Just as he can deduct expenses which he has incurred, so, if he
ought to have incurred expenses and did not do so, he must answer for
his negligence, unless he is a *bona-fide* possessor; and then as he
neglected his own business, as it were, no suit can be brought against
him before that for the recovery of the estate; but after that time he
himself is a plunderer.

\(4) It is evident that a plunderer cannot be called to account for
permitting debtors to be released from liability, or to become poor,
instead of suing them immediately, since he had no right of action.

\(5) Let us see whether a possessor is required to refund what has been
paid him. Whether he was a *bona-fide* possessor or not, it is
established that he must make restitution, and if he does do so, (as
Cassius states, and Julianus also in the Sixth Book) the debtors are
released by operation of law.

\32. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

Property which is acquired through a slave must be delivered to the
heir. This rule applies also to the estate of a freeman, and where
proceedings are instituted on the ground of an inofficious testament,
when, for the time being, the slave is included in the property of the
heir:

\33. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

Unless the slave entered into a stipulation based on the property of
said heir.

\(1) Julianus says that where a possessor sold a slave, if the latter
was not required by the estate, he can be asked in the action for
recovery to pay over the purchase-money, as he would have been charged
with it if he had not sold him; but where the slave was required by the
estate, he himself must be delivered, if he is living, but if he is
dead, perhaps not even the price paid for him should be surrendered; but
he says that the judge who has jurisdiction of the case will not permit
the possessor to appropriate the purchase-money, and this is the better
opinion.

\34. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

I am of the opinion that where the estate of the son of a family, who is
a soldier, is left to anyone by will, an action to recover the same can
be brought.

\(1) Where a slave, or the son of a family has possession of property
belonging to an estate, suit can be brought for the estate by either the
father or the master, if the party has the power to give up the
property. It is evident, if the master has obtained the purchase-money
of property belonging to the estate, as a portion of the slave's
*peculium*,

that then, as Julianus holds, the suit for recovery can be brought
against the master as the possessor of a right.

\35. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

Julianus likewise says that "A suit for the recovery of an estate can be
brought against the master, as the possessor of a right, even where the
slave has not yet received the purchase-money of the property, for the
reason that he has a right of action by which he can recover the money;
which right of action may be acquired by any one even if he is not aware
of the fact".

\36. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

Where suit for the recovery of an estate is brought against the owner of
a slave or a father, who has the purchase money, should proceedings be
instituted within a year after the death of the son or the slave, or
after the slave has been manumitted, or the son emancipated? Julianus
states that the better opinion is (and in this Proculus also concurs),
that a perpetual action should be granted and that it is not necessary
for the party's own debt to be deducted, because the proceedings do not
relate to *peculium*, but suit is brought for the recovery of an estate.
This is correct where the slave or the son has the purchase-money; but
if the suit is brought against the owner of the slave, because the
debtor himself is a slave, action should be taken as if the *peculium*
was involved in the case. Mauricianus says that the same rule applies,
even if the slave or the son squanders the money obtained as the price,
but it can be made good in some other way out of his *peculium*.

\(1) There is, however, no doubt that a suit for the recovery of an
estate can be brought against the son of a family, because he has the
power to deliver it; just as he has to produce it in court. With much
more reason can we say that an action for recovery can be brought
against the son of a family who, when he was the head of a household and
in possession of the estate, permitted himself to be arrogated.

\(2) If the possessor should kill a slave belonging to the estate, this
also can be included in the action for its recovery; but Pomponius says
that the plaintiff must elect whether he desires judgment to be rendered
in his favor against the possessor; provided he gives security that he
will not proceed under the *Lex Aquilia*, or whether he prefers that his
right of action under the *Lex Aquilia* should remain unimpaired, and
not have an appraisement of the property made by the court. This right
of election applies where the slave was killed before the estate was
entered upon; for, if this were done subsequently, then the right of
action becomes his own, and cannot be included in the suit to recover
the estate.

\(3) Where a plunderer fraudulently relinquishes possession, and the
property is destroyed in the same way that it would have been destroyed
if he had remained in possession under the same circumstances; then,
considering the words of the Decree of the Senate, the position of the
plunderer is preferable to that of the *bona-fide* posses-

sor; because the former, if he fraudulently relinquished possession, can
have judgment rendered against him just as if he was still in
possession, and it is not added in the decree: "If the property should
be destroyed". There is no question, however, that the position of the
plunderer ought not to be better than that of the *bona-fide* possessor.
Therefore, if the property brought more than it was worth, the plaintiff
should have the right to choose whether or not he will take the
purchase-money; otherwise, the plunderer will profit to a certain
extent.

\(4) Some doubt is expressed as to the time when a *bona-fide *possessor
became enriched; but the better opinion is that the time when the case
was decided should be considered in this instance.

\(5) With reference to profits, it is understood that the expenses
incurred in the production, collection, and preservation of the profits
themselves should be deducted, and this is not only positively demanded
on the ground of natural justice in the case of *bona-fide* possessors,
but also in that of plunderers, as was also held by Sabinus.

\37. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

Where a person has incurred expense and realized no profit, it is
perfectly just that the expense should be taken into account in the case
of *bona-fide* possessors.

\38. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

In the case of other necessary and useful expenses, it is evident that
these can be separated, so that *bona-fide* possessors may receive
credit for the same, but the plunderer can only blame himself if he
knowingly expended money on the property of another. It is more
indulgent, however, to hold that, in this instance, the account of his
expenses should be allowed, for the plaintiff ought not to profit by the
loss of another, and it is a part of the duty of the judge to attend to
this; for no exception on the ground of fraud is needed.

It is clear that the following difference may exist between the parties
for the *bona-fide* possessor may, under all circumstances, deduct his
expenses, although the matter in which they were incurred no longer
exists, just as a guardian or a curator may obtain allowance for his;
but a plunderer cannot do so, except where the property is rendered
better through the expenditure.

\39. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

Expenses are considered useful and necessary where they are incurred for
the purpose of repairing buildings, or in nurseries of trees, or where
damages are paid on account of slaves, since it is more advantageous to
make payment than to surrender the slave; and it is clear that there
must be many other causes for expenses of this kind.

\(1) Let us examine, however, whether we cannot also have the benefit of
an exception on the ground of fraud with reference to expenditures for
pictures, statues, and other things purchased for pleasure, so long as
we are possessors in good faith; for while it may very

properly be said to a plunderer that he should not have incurred
unnecessary expenses on the property of another, still, he should always
have the power to remove whatever can be taken away without injury to
the property itself.

\40. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

The statement also which is contained in the Address of the Divine
Hadrian, namely: "That after issue has been joined, that must be
delivered to the plaintiff which he would have had if the estate had
been surrendered to him at the time when he brought the suit," sometimes
entails hardship. For what if, after issue had been joined, slaves,
beasts of burden, or cattle, should die? In this instance, the party in
compliance with the terms of the Address, must indemnify the plaintiff,
because the latter could have sold them if the estate had been
surrendered. It is held by Proculus that this would be proper where suit
is brought to recover specific articles, but Cassius thinks otherwise.
The opinion of Proculus is correct where a plunderer is concerned, and
that of Cassius is correct in the case of *bona-fide* possessors; for a
possessor is not obliged to furnish security against death, or, through
fear of such an accident, injudiciously to leave his own right
undefended.

\(1) The plunderer is not entitled to any profit which he makes, but it
increases the estate; and therefore he must deliver whatever is gained
by the profits themselves. In the case of a *bona-fide* possessor, those
profits only by means of which the possessor has become enriched will be
included in the restitution as an increase of the estate.

\(2) Where the possessor has obtained any rights of action, he must
surrender them if he is evicted from the estate; for example, where an
interdict *Unde vi*, or *Quod precario*, has been granted him.

\(3) On the other hand, also, where the possessor has given security for
the prevention of the threatened injury, he must be indemnified.

\(4) Noxal actions are likewise included in the jurisdiction of the
judge, so that if the possessor is prepared to surrender a slave on
account of some damage which he has committed against the estate, or
because he has been guilty of theft, he shall be released from
liability, just as is done in the interdict *Quod vi aut clam*.

\41. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

If at the time when suit was brought against the possessor of the
estate, he held but little property belonging to it and afterwards also
obtained possession of more, he will be compelled to surrender this as
well, if he loses his case, whether he obtained possession of the same
before or after issue was joined. If the sureties whom he furnished are
not sufficient for the amount involved, the proconsul shall require him
to furnish such as are suitable. On the other hand, if he acquires
possession of less property than he had in the beginning, provided this
happens without any fraud on his part, he should be discharged from
liability so far as the property which he had ceased to hold is
concerned.

\(1) Julianus says that the profits obtained from property which the
deceased held as pledges must also be included.

\42. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXVII*.

Where a debtor to the estate refuses to pay, not because he says that he
is an heir, but for the reason that he denies, or doubts that the estate
belongs to the party who is bringing suit for the recovery of the same,
he will not be liable under the action for recovery.

\43. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book II*.

After I accepted a legacy from you, I brought an action to recover the
estate. Atilicinus says that it has been held by certain authorities
that I am not entitled to an action for recovery against you, unless I
refund the legacy. Still, let us consider whether the plaintiff who
brings an action to recover the estate is only obliged to return the
legacy where security is given him that, if judgment is rendered against
him in the case, the legacy will be repaid to him; since it is unjust
that in this instance the possessor should retain a legacy which he had
paid, and especially where his adversary did not bring the action for
the purpose of annoyance, but on account of a mistake; and Lælius
approves this opinion. The Emperor Antoninus, however, stated in a
Rescript that where a man retained a legacy under a will, an action for
the recovery of the estate should be refused him, where proper cause was
shown; that is, where the intention to cause annoyance was manifest.

\44. *Javolenus, On Plautius, Book I*.

Where a party who has received a legacy under a will brings an action
for the recovery of the estate, and, for some reason or other, the
legacy is not returned, it is the duty of the judge to cause the estate
to be surrendered to the plaintiff, after deducting the amount which he
received.

\45. *Celsus, Digest, Book IV*.

Where anyone volunteers in the defence of a case without having the
property in his possession, judgment shall be rendered against him;
unless he can show by the clearest evidence that the plaintiff, from the
beginning of the suit, was aware that he was not in possession of the
property; because, under these circumstances, he was not deceived, and
he who volunteered in defence of the action for recovery will be liable
on the ground of fraud; and of course the damages must be estimated
according to the interest the plaintiff had in not being deceived.

\46. *Modestinus, Differences, Book VI*.

He should be understood to be, to all intents and purposes, a plunderer,
who tacitly agrees to deliver the estate to someone who has no right to
it.

\47. *The Same, Opinions, Book VIII*.

A certain Lucius Titius having failed to have the testament of a
relative set aside as forged; I ask whether he would not be able to file

a complaint against the testament as being improperly executed, and not
sealed? The answer was that he would not be prevented from instituting
proceedings to show that the testament was not executed according to
law, just because he did not succeed in having it set aside as forged.

\48. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book IV*.

In appraising the value of an estate, the purchase-money obtained for
its sale must be included, as well as the addition of whatever else it
was worth, if this was done on account of business; but where it is
disposed of in compliance with the terms of a trust, nothing more will
be included than what the party acquired in good faith.

\49. *Papinianus, Questions, Book HI*.

Where a *bona-fide* possessor wishes to institute proceedings against
debtors of an estate, or parties who hold property belonging to the
same, he should, by all means, be heard, if there is danger of any
rights of action being lost by delay. The plaintiff, however, can bring
an action *in rem* for the recovery of the estate without fear of being
met by an exception. But what, for example, if the possessor of the
estate is negligent, or knows that he has no legal right?

\50. *The Same, Questions, Book VI*.

An estate may exist under the law even though it does not include
anything corporeal.

\(1) Where a *bona-fide* possessor erects a monument to a deceased
person for the purpose of complying with a condition, it may be said
because the wish of the deceased is observed in this matter, that if the
expense of erecting a monument does not exceed a reasonable amount, or
more than that ordered by the testator to be expended for this purpose,
the party from whom the estate is recovered will have the right to
retain the amount expended, by pleading an exception based on fraud; or
he can recover the same by a suit on the ground of business transacted,
or, as it were, for attending to matters connected with the estate.
Although by the strict rule of law heirs are not liable to any action to
force them to erect a monument, still, they may be compelled by Imperial
or pontifical authority to comply with the last will of the deceased.

\51. *The Same, Opinions, Book II*.

The heir of an insane person will be compelled to indemnify the
substitute or a relative in the next degree for the profits of the
intermediate time by means of which the said insane person seems to have
become enriched through his curator; with the exception of such expenses
as have been incurred either necessarily or beneficially with reference
to the estate. Where, however, any necessary expense has been incurred
in behalf of the said insane person, it must also be excepted; unless
the said insane person had other sufficient property by means of which
he could be supported.

\(1) Interest on profits received after the action to recover an estate
has been brought is not to be paid. A different rule is applicable where
they were received before the action for recovery of the estate was
brought, and for that reason increased the assets.

\52. *Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II*.

Where a possessor has obtained dishonorable profits from an estate, he
will be compelled to surrender them also, lest a strict construction may
give him the benefit of profits not honorably acquired.

\53. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X*.

The alienation of property by the possessor is necessary, not only for
the payment of debts by the estate, but where expenses have been
incurred by the possessor on account of the estate, or where property is
liable to be destroyed or deteriorated by delay.

\54. *Julianus, Digest, Book VI*.

Where a party purchases from the Treasury certain shares in an estate,
or the whole of it, it is not unjust that a right of action should be
granted him by which he may bring suit for the entire property; just as
a right of action for recovery is granted to anyone to whom an estate
has been delivered under the Trebellian Decree of the Senate.

\(1) There is no doubt that the heir of a debtor can, by an action for
the recovery of the estate, obtain possession of articles pledged by the
deceased.

\(2) Where buildings and lands have become deteriorated through the
negligence of the possessor; for instance, where vineyards, orchards, or
gardens have been cultivated in a manner which was not like that
employed by the deceased owner; the possessor must permit an assessment
of damages in court to the extent to which the property has been
diminished in value.

\55. *The Same, Digest, Book LX*.

When an estate has been recovered by suit, the *bona-fide *possessor
will be compelled to surrender whatever he has collected under the *Lex
Aquilia*, not only to the extent of the simple value, but to double the
amount; for he should not make a profit out of what he collected on
account of the estate.

\56. *Africanus, Questions, Book IV*.

When an action is brought for the recovery of an estate, all the profits
acquired by the possessor must be surrendered, even where the plaintiff
himself would not have obtained them.

\57. *Neratius, Parchments, Book VII*.

Where the same party defends two actions against the same estate, and
judgment is rendered in favor of one of them, the question sometimes
arises whether the estate should then be surrendered to him who gained
the suit, just as would have been done if no defence had been

made against the other; so that, in fact, if judgment should afterwards
be rendered in favor of the other party, the defendant would be released
from liability; since he was neither in possession, nor had acted
fraudulently to avoid being in possession, as he had surrendered the
property when he lost the case; or because it was possible that the
other plaintiff might be able to obtain a decision in his favor, the
defendant should not be obliged to surrender the estate unless security
is given him, for the reason that he was compelled to defend the action
for recovery of the estate against the other party. The better opinion
is that it should be the judge's duty to come to the relief of the
defeated party by security or a bond, since in that way the property
remains for the benefit of him who is slow in asserting his rights
against the successful plaintiff who preceded him.

\58. *Scævola, Digest, Book III*.

A son who was emancipated by his father in compliance with a condition
of his mother's will, entered upon the estate which his father had
possession of before he emancipated his son, and of which he had also
obtained the profits, and expended some of them in honor of his son, who
was a senator. The question arose, as the father was prepared to
surrender the estate, after having reserved the sum which he had
expended for his son, whether the latter, if he still persisted in
prosecuting his action for the recovery of the estate, could be barred
by an exception on the ground of fraud? I answered that even if the
father did not avail himself of the exception, the duty required of the
judge could sufficiently dispose of the matter.

TITLE IV.

CONCERNING ACTIONS FOR THE RECOVERY OP A PORTION

OF AN ESTATE.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book V*.

After the action which the prætor promises to grant to a party who
alleges that the entire estate belongs to him, it follows that he should
grant an action to him who demands a share of the estate.

\(1) Where anyone brings suit for an estate, or for a portion of the
same, he does not base his claim upon the amount which the possessor
holds, but upon his own right; and therefore, if he is the sole heir, he
will claim the entire estate, although the other party may be in
possession of only one thing; and if he is an heir to one share of it he
will demand a share, even though the other party may be in possession of
the entire estate.

\(2) Nay, more, where two parties are in possession of an estate, and
two others allege that certain shares belong to them, the latter are not
required to be content with making their claims against the two in
possession; as, for instance, the first claimant against the first
possessor, or the second against the second possessor, but both should
bring suit against the first, and both against the second; for one has

not the possession of the share claimed by the first, and the other
possession of that claimed by the second, but both are in possession of
the shares of each of the others, in the character of heirs.

Where the possessor and plaintiff both have possession of the estate,
each of them alleging that he is entitled to half of it, they must bring
suit against one another, in order to obtain their shares of the
property; or, if they do not raise any controversy on the ground of
inheritance, they must bring suit for partition of the estate.

\(3) Where I claim to be the heir to a share of an estate, and my
co-heir, together with a stranger, is in possession, since my co-heir
has no more than his share, the question arises, whether I must bring
suit for the recovery of the estate against the stranger alone or
against my co-heir also? Pegasus is said to have held the opinion that I
should bring suit against the stranger alone, and that he must surrender
whatever he has in his possession; and perhaps this should be ordered by
the court upon application. Reason, however, suggests that I ought to
bring suit for recovery of the estate against both of them; that is to
say, against my co-heir also, and the latter ought to bring suit against
the possessor who is a stranger. The opinion of Pegasus is, however, the
more equitable one.

\(4) Moreover, if I claim to be heir to half of the estate, and I am in
possession of a third of the same, and I desire to obtain the remaining
sixth let us consider what plan I should adopt. Labeo states that I
should bring suit against each one for half, so that the result will be
that I should obtain a sixth part from each of them, and shall then have
two thirds. This I think to be correct, but I myself will be required to
surrender one sixth of the third which I formerly possessed; and
therefore the judge in the discharge of his duty must direct me to set
off what I possess, if my co-heirs are the parties from whom I am
claiming the estate.

\(5) The prætor sometimes grants permission to bring suit for a portion
of an estate which is not certainly ascertained, where proper cause
exists; for instance, where there is a son of a deceased brother, and
the surviving wives of other deceased brothers are pregnant. In this
case it is uncertain what portion of the estate the son of the deceased
brother can claim, because it is not known how many children of the
other deceased brothers will be born. Therefore, it is perfectly just
that the claim of a share which is not known should be granted to the
son; so that it may not be too much to say that where anyone is
reasonably doubtful as to what share he should bring suit to recover, he
ought to be permitted to claim a share which is as yet uncertain.

\2. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

Where the same estate belongs to several persons some of whom enter upon
the same, and others deliberate as to its acceptance, it is held that if
those who enter bring an action to recover the estate, they should not
sue for a larger share than they would have had if the others had
entered upon it; nor will it be of any advantage to them if the others
do not enter. But if the others do not enter, they can then

bring suit for the shares of the latter, provided they are entitled to
them.

\3. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book XVII*.

The ancient authorities were so solicitous to maintain the interest of
an unborn child who would be free at birth, that they reserved all its
rights unimpaired until the time it was to be born. This is apparent in
the law of succession concerning those who are in a more remote degree
of relationship than the unborn child, and who are not admitted to the
succession, as long as it is uncertain whether or not a child will be
born. Where, however, there are others in the same degree of
relationship as the one that is unborn, then the question has arisen
what share of the estate should remain in suspense, since it is
impossible to ascertain how many may be born; hence, there are so many
various and incredible accounts given with reference to this matter that
they are usually classed with fables. It is said that four daughters
were born of a married woman at a single birth; and, also, certain
writers, who are not unreliable, have stated that five children were
born of a Peloponnesian woman on four different occasions, and that many
Egyptian women have had several children at once. We have seen three
brothers, the Horatii, senators, of one birth, girded for battle; and
Lælius states that he had seen a free woman on the Palatine Hill who had
been brought from Alexandria in order to be shown to Hadrian with her
five children, four of whom he alleges she was said to have brought
forth at one time, and the fifth four days afterwards.

What conclusion must then be arrived at? Authors learned in the law have
taken a middle course, namely, they have considered what might not very
rarely occur; and as three might happen to be born on one occasion, they
assigned a fourth share to the son already born; for (as Theophrastus
says) what happens once or twice, legislators pay no attention to, and
therefore if a woman is actually about to bring forth only one child,
the heir that is living will be entitled, not to half of the estate, but
only to a fourth of the same:

\4. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XV*.

And where a less number are born, his share will increase in proportion;
and if more than three are born, there will be a decrease in the share
to which he became the heir.

\5. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book XVII*.

The following should be borne in mind, namely, that if a woman is not
pregnant, but it is thought that she is, her son in the meantime is sole
heir to the estate, although he is not aware that he is such.

\(1) The same rule applies in the case of a stranger, where he is
appointed heir to a certain portion of an estate, and posthumous
children to the remainder. But if the appointment of heirs should happen
to be made in the following terms: "All children born to me, together
with Lucius Titius, shall be heirs to equal shares"; doubt may arise
whether he cannot enter upon the estate, just as one who did not know

to what share he was entitled under the will. It is more advantageous,
however, that he should be enabled to enter upon the estate if he does
not know to what share of the same he is entitled, provided he is not
ignorant of other matters which he should know.

\6. *Ulpianus, Opinions, Book VI*.

Where it has been decided that a sister is co-heir together with her
four brothers to the estate of their mother, a fifth part of each of the
shares which they possessed must be granted to her, so that they will
give her no more than the fifth part of each one of the separate four
shares to which they had previously believed themselves to be entitled.

\(1) Where expenses are justly incurred on account of liabilities of an
estate, they must be calculated proportionally against the party who has
obtained a share of the estate by the right of a patron.

\7. *Julianus, Digest, Book VIII*.

A party cannot obtain what he has secured by a judgment in an action for
partition by means of an action for the recovery of an estate, the
community of a joint ownership having been dissolved; for the
jurisdiction of the judge only extends to his being able to order that
an undivided share of the estate shall be delivered to the party
applying for it.

\8. *The Same, Digest, Book XLVIII*.

The possessor of an estate should be permitted to defend the action so
far as surrendering a share of the same is concerned; for he is not
prohibited from holding the entire estate, as he is aware that half of
it belongs to him, and does not raise any controversy with reference to
the other half.

\9. *Paulus, Epitomes of the Digest of Alfenus, Book HI*.

Where several heirs were appointed, and one of them at the time was in
Asia, his agent made a sale and kept the money as the share of his
principal. It was subsequently ascertained that the heir who was in Asia
had previously died, after having appointed his agent heir to half his
share and another party to the other half; and the question arose in
what way an action to recover the money derived from the estate could be
brought? The answer was that it ought to be brought for the entire
estate against the party who had been the agent, because the money
belonging to the estate had come into the possession of the said agent
through the sale; nevertheless, they must bring an action against this
co-heir for half the estate. The result would then be that if all the
money was in the possession of the party who had been the agent, they
might recover the entire amount from him, with the assistance of the
court; or if he had returned half of it to his co-heir, they could take
judgment against him for half, and against his co-heir for the other
half.

\10. *Papinianus, Questions, Book VI*.

Where the son of a person who was appointed heir to a certain portion of
an estate was ignorant of the fact that his father had died

during the lifetime of the testator, attended to the share of the estate
in behalf of his father, as if he was absent, and, having sold certain
property, collected the purchase-money of the same; an action for
recovery could not be brought against him because he did not hold the
purchase-money, either as heir or as possessor, but as a son who had
transacted business for his father; but an action on the ground of
business transacted would be granted to the other co-heirs, to whom a
share of the estate of the deceased belonged. The following, therefore,
should not give rise to apprehension, that is to say, that the son
should be held liable to the heirs of his father (by whom perhaps he was
disinherited), because he was, as it were, attending to their business
which was connected with the estate; since the matter in which he was
engaged did not belong to the estate of his father; for it is only just
that, where an action based on business transacted is brought in behalf
of another, what is collected for someone else ought to be given up to
the party entitled to it. But, in the present instance, the business did
not belong to the father, as he had ceased to exist, nor did it belong
to the paternal succession, since it arose out of the estate of another.

When, however, the son becomes the heir of his father and raises the
controversy that his father died after he had become the heir; the
question arises whether he may be considered to have changed the
character of his right of possession? Nevertheless, as a party who has
been transacting the business of an estate, and has become indebted on
account of it, and afterwards raises a controversy with reference to the
succession, can be sued as a possessor of a right; it must be held that,
in this instance, the same rule is also applicable to the son.

TITLE V.

CONCERNING POSSESSORY ACTIONS FOR THE RECOVERY OF ESTATES.

\1. *Ulpiamis, On the Edict, Book XV*.

It is customary for the prætor to consider those parties whom he
constitutes actual heirs; that is to say, to whom the possession of the
estate is granted, after civil actions have been proposed to the heirs:

\2. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VI*.

And, by means of this action for the recovery of an estate, the
possessor of the property obtains just as much as an heir can obtain and
secure by means of the civil actions above mentioned.

TITLE VI.

CONCERNING SUITS FOR THE RECOVERY OF TRUST ESTATES.

\1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Next in order comes the action open to parties to whom an estate is
delivered. Anyone who receives an estate which has been delivered

in compliance with a decree of the Senate in pursuance of which rights
of action pass, can make use of the action for the recovery of an estate
founded upon a trust:

\2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX*.

And this action has the same effect as a civil suit for the recovery of
an estate.

\3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVI*.

Nor does it make any difference whether a person was requested to
deliver the property to me or to him to whom I am the heir; and if I am
the possessor of the estate of some other successor of the party to whom
it was left in trust, I can proceed by means of this action.

\(1) It must be remembered that this action will not lie against anyone
who surrenders the estate.

\(2) These actions which are granted to me can be brought in favor of my
heir, as well as against him.

* * * * *
