# -*- mode: org -*-

FOURTH COMMENTARY.

​(1) It remains for us to speak of actions. And if we inquire how many
kinds of actions there are, the better opinion seems to be that there
are but two, real and personal; for those who say that there are four,
and include such as arise from solemn agreements, do not perceive that
some kinds of actions are subdivided into others.

​(2) A personal action is one which we bring against anyone who is
liable to us under a contract, or on account of a crime; that is, that
(what) we claim is that he is bound to give something, to do something,
or to perform some service.

​(3) A real action is one in which we either claim some corporeal
property to be ours, or that we are entitled to some particular right in
the property, for instance, the right of use and enjoyment; or the right
to walk or drive through the land of another; or to conduct water from
his land; or to raise the height of a building, or to have the view
unobstructed; or when a negative action is brought by the adverse party.

​(4) Therefore, these actions being distinct, it is certain that we
cannot make use of the following form to recover our property from
another, namely: "If it appears that he should be required to transfer
it." For what is ours cannot be transferred to us, as it is understood
that what is given to us is given for the purpose that it may become
ours, and property which already belongs to us cannot become ours any
more than it now is. Through hatred of thieves, and for the purpose of
making them liable to a greater number of actions, the rule has been
adopted that, in addition to the penalty of double and quadruple the
value of the property obtained, thieves are also liable to the form: "If
it appears that the defendant should be required to transfer the
property"; even though the action by which we seek to recover what
belongs to us may also be brought against him.

​(5) Moreover, real actions are styled suits for the recovery of
property, but personal actions, by which we assert that something must
be given, or some act be performed, are called *condictiones*.

​(6) Again, we sometimes bring suit merely to recover property;
sometimes only to recover the penalty; and sometimes to recover both.

​(7) For example, we sue merely to recover property in actions brought
under a contract.

​(8) We bring suit only to recover a penalty, for example, in the
actions of theft and of injury; and, according to the opinion of certain
authorities, in an action for goods taken by violence; for we are
entitled to recover the property by either a real or a personal action.

​(9) Moreover, we bring suit to recover both the property and a penalty;
for instance, in those cases in which we bring our action for double
damages against a party who defends the case; and this happens in an
action to recover a judgment debt; or expenses paid for a principal; or
damages for injury under the *Lex Aquilia;* or to recover legacies; or a
certain sum which has been bequeathed by condemnation.

​(10) Moreover, there are some actions which refer to the ancient form
of judicial procedure upon which they are based; and others become
operative by their own force and power. In order that this may be clear,
we must first treat of those which are based upon ancient judicial
procedure.

​(11) These actions which the ancients employed were so designated,
either for the reason that they were provided by the law — although at
that time the edicts of the Prætor, by means of which many new actions
were introduced, had not come into use — or, because they followed the
words of the law, and therefore, like the law itself, were observed
without any alteration. Hence, it was decided that, a person who brought
an action against another for cutting his vines, and in the pleadings
called them "vines," should lose his case, as he ought to have called
them "trees," because the Law of the Twelve Tables, under which the
action for cutting vines was brought, speaks in general terms of the
cutting of trees.

​(12) Actions were brought in five ways under the ancient form of
judicial procedure, and were called *Sacramentum, Judicis Postulatio,
Condictio, Manus Injectio, Pignoris Capio*.^[1]^

​(13) The action *Sacramentum* was a general one, for where no provision
was made by the law in any other way for bringing suit with

^[1]^ The *legis actiones* were the earliest forms of judicial procedure
known to the Roman law for the collection of claims and the enforcement
of obligations. As will be observed, they are of a very primitive
character, and it is surprising, when taking into consideration the
wonderful progress of the Roman people in intelligence and knowledge,
that these antiquated and cumbersome methods survived for so long a
period. They were based upon the Twelve Tables; upon customs which, by
continuous usage, had acquired full legal authority; upon the decision
of the various popular tribunals; and upon statutes which were passed
from time to time either for the purpose of explaining or confirming
obscure or disputed points of ancient jurisprudence, that is, what was
ordinarily designated the Civil Law. The extreme nicety with which the
established forms were required to be observed, and which, if neglected
in the slightest particular, caused the litigant to irretrievably lose
his case, forcibly recalls the technical accuracy demanded by the old
system of Common Law pleading that, for generations, exercised to the
utmost the legal ingenuity and skill of the English practitioner. The
equitable jurisdiction of the Prætor was expressly devised to remedy the
abuses and relieve the distress to which rigid adherence to the rules of
the *legis actiones* constantly gave rise. This innovation was deplored
by the eminent jurisconsults of Rome, who regarded any change introduced
into the existing judicial procedure as unnecessary, dangerous, and
revolutionary; an example which was subsequently followed to the letter
by the lawyers of England upon the establishment of the Court of
Chancery, of which the Prætorian Tribunal was the prototype.

The *Sacramentum*, so called from the wager or forfeit, which involved
the deposit by the parties in the hands of the Pontiffs, for the benefit
of the *sacra publica*,

reference to certain property, it was done by means of an oath. This
proceeding was attended with danger to the party swearing falsely; just
as, at present, is the case in the action for the recovery of money
lent, on account of the solemn agreement by which the defendant assumes
a risk if he rashly denies the claim, and because of the counter
engagement by which the plaintiff becomes liable if he did not recover
the debt. Hence, the party who was defeated was obliged to pay the
amount of money deposited by way of penalty, which was placed in the
Public Treasury; and, for this reason, sureties were given to the
Prætor; instead of, as at present, the amount deposited as penalty being
for the benefit of the party who gained the case.

​(14) The amount deposited by way of penalty in this proceeding was
either five hundred, or fifty asses; five hundred were deposited when
the property in question was worth a thousand or more asses, and fifty
when it was worth less than a thousand; for this was provided by the Law
of the Twelve Tables. When, however, the controversy was with reference
to the freedom of a slave, although he may have been extremely valuable,
still the amount deposited by way of penalty was only fifty asses. This
was also provided by the Twelve Tables in favor of freedom, in order
that the protector of the slave might not be unduly oppressed . . . .
.^[1]^

​(15) Moreover, when all these actions were brought to enforce an
obligation, the parties, having furnished sureties, agreed to again
appear for the appointment of a judge; and having returned after thirty
days, the judge was appointed in accordance with the *Lex Pinaria*;
while before this law was enacted he was appointed immediately. We
understand from what has been already stated, that if the property in
dispute was worth less than a thousand asses, the amount deposited

and by way of security, of a quantity of bronze or copper equal in value
to double that of the property in controversy, half of which was lost by
the one who was defeated, was originally the only method of civil
procedure among the Romans.

Little of the *Judicis Postulatio* is known to us but the name, which
has reference to an application to the magistrate to appoint a judge or
arbiter to hear the case, after joinder of issue; and therefore, that it
made provision for arbitration.

The *Condictio* was strictly a personal action for the recovery of a
certain sum of money which had either been loaned, or paid by mistake.
It was introduced as a convenient substitute for the preceding and more
complex forms. The plaintiff, by appearing before the Prætor, could
force the defendant to agree (*condicere*) to have a judge appointed
within thirty days.

The *Manus Injectio* enabled a surety who had paid the debt, to seize
and imprison the principal until the latter had fully reimbursed him, if
six months had elapsed after payment.

The *Pignoris Capio*, as stated in the text, lay for the enforcement of
obligations to soldiers for subsistence and pay, as well as to enable
magistrates to compel parties against whom judgments had been rendered
to comply with them. In effect, it was almost identical with levying a
distress under the English law. The last two of the *legis actiones*,
rather belong to the category of legal processes or forms of execution,
than to lawsuits, in the strict sense of the term.

We are indebted to Gaius for the most complete account of these curious
old methods of judicial procedure and which, while far from
satisfactory, is still more detailed than those of other Roman writers
on jurisprudence, who, for the most part, only vaguely refer to the
subject. The *legis actiones*were nominally abolished B. C. 167. — ed.

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

was usually only fifty, and not five hundred. Then, after the judge had
been appointed, the parties gave notice to one another to appear before
him on the third day following. Finally, when they came into court, and
before the case was argued, it was customary to state it briefly, and in
a concise manner; which was called the presentation of the case, which
was, as it were, a mere summary of the same.

​(16) When a real action was instituted, the movable property, and that
which could move itself and be brought into court, was demanded as
follows. The party making the claim, held a staff, and then grasping the
object in dispute, as for instance, a slave, said: "I declare this slave
to belong to me, on account of his condition, in accordance with
quiritarian right. See! in accordance with what I have stated, I have
placed my staff upon him"; and, at the same time, he laid the staff upon
the slave. His opponent then said and did the same thing, and when both
of them had asserted their claims, the Prætor said: "Both of you release
your hold upon the slave"; and they did so. The one who first asserted
his claim, then interrogated the other as follows: "I ask whether you
will state on what ground you make this claim?" and he replied, "I
asserted my right to him by placing my staff upon him." The first
claimant than said, "As you have wrongfully claimed him I call upon you
to deposit five hundred asses by way of forfeit," and his opponent then
said, "I call upon you to do the same"; (that is if the property was
worth more than a thousand asses five hundred were deposited but if it
is worth less only fifty was the amount of the forfeiture).

After this the same proceedings took place as in a personal action, and
then the Prætor made a temporary disposition of the property in favor of
one of the parties, that is to say, he gave him possession of it for the
time, and ordered him to furnish sureties to his adversary for the
expenses of the suit as well as the mesne profits of the property which
was the object of the action. The Prætor, moreover, took sureties for
the forfeits, from both parties, for the benefit of the Public Treasury.
The staff was employed instead of a spear, as an emblem of lawful
ownership, for whatever was taken from an enemy a man considered to be
absolutely his own; wherefore in cases tried before the *Centumviri*, a
spear was placed in front of the tribunal.

​(17) If the property was of such a nature that it could not be brought
or led into court without inconvenience, as for instance, if it
consisted of a column, or a drove of cattle of any kind, a certain
portion was brought in, and then the claim was made for that portion
just as if all of it was present. Therefore, if the property in dispute
consisted of a flock of sheep or goats, a single sheep or goat was
brought into court, or even a single tuft of wool was produced; or if it
consisted of a ship, or a column, a small part was broken off; and, in
like manner, if a tract of land or a building, or an estate was the
subject of controversy, a small part was brought in, and a claim was
made for it in the same manner as if all the property was there; as, for
instance, a clod was taken from the land, or a tile was taken from the
building;

and if the dispute was with reference to an estate, in like manner the
property itself, or some part of it was produced in court . . . .^[1]^

(17a) . . . .^[1]^ For they observed the same time and the same manner
in appointing a judge, and agreed upon a day when they would be ready to
receive the judge, for to "agree upon" meant originally "to notify".

​(18) Therefore, this action was very properly styled a notification,
for the plaintiff was accustomed to notify his adversary to appear
before the court on the thirtieth day to receive a judge. At present,
however, we do not properly call a suit of this kind by which we
institute proceedings to have property conveyed to us a personal action,
for now no notice is given for this purpose.

​(19) This form of judicial procedure was established by the *Lex
Silia*and the *Lex Calpurnia*; by the *Lex Silia*, to receive a certain
sum of money, and by the *Lex Calpurnia*, to recover any other property
which was certain.

​(20) It has frequently been asked why this action was required when we
could either by *Sacramentum* or *Judicis Postulatio*, obtain the
transfer of property to which we are entitled.

​(21) The proceeding of *Manus Injectio* was employed in certain cases,
as for instance, by the Law of the Twelve Tables, when judgment had been
obtained against a debtor. This was as follows: the party who brought
the suit said, "As judgment has been rendered against you, or you have
been condemned to pay me ten thousand sesterces, and you have not paid
them, for this reason I lay my hands upon you, as being indebted to me
under the judgment for ten thousand sesterces"; and at the same time he
seized him by some part of the body, and the debtor was not permitted to
resist, or to protect himself by law, but he appointed a defender, who
conducted the case for him, or, if he did not do so, he was taken to his
house by the plaintiff and placed in chains.

​(22) Subsequently, certain laws in some other cases, permitted the
arrest of debtors against whom judgment had been rendered; as the *Lex
Publilia* against a party for whom his sponsor had paid the debt, if,
within the next six months from the time when it was paid, he had not
indemnified him; likewise, the *Lex Furia de Sponsu* against one who had
collected from his sponsor more than his proportionate share; and
finally, many other laws granted proceedings of this kind in numerous
instances.

​(23) Other enactments provided that, on certain grounds, proceedings
could be instituted by the imposition of hands; but this was the simple
act, and not authorized in the case of debtors against whom judgment had
been rendered; for instance, the *Lex Furia Testamentaria* permitted
this to be done against a party who, as a legatee or the recipient of a
donation *mortis causa*, had received more than a thousand asses, when
he was not excepted under this law, and was entitled to receive more;
also the *Lex Marcia*against money-lenders, so that if they collected
interest, they could be compelled by this proceeding to refund it.

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

​(24) By these laws and others similar to them, the defendant was
permitted to resist arrest, and take legal measures to defend himself,
for the plaintiff in this form of judicial procedure was not entitled to
add the words, "On account of a judgment rendered"; but after having
stated his cause of action, said: "For this reason I lay hands upon
you"; just as he in whose favor proceedings were instituted on account
of a judgment, after having stated his cause of action, said: "I arrest
you on account of the judgment which has been rendered against you." It
has not escaped my notice that in proceedings under the *Lex Furia
Testamentaria* the words, "On account of the judgment rendered against
you," were inserted, although they do not appear in the law itself;
which seems to have been done without any reason.

​(25) Afterwards, however, by the *Lex Vallia* all other defendants,
except judgment debtors and principals whose debts had been paid by
their sureties, were permitted to resist arrest, and avail themselves of
the law for their defence, when this proceeding was instituted against
them. Therefore, the party against whom judgment was rendered, and one
whose debt had been paid by his surety were, even after this law,
required to appoint a defender; and if they did not do so, were taken to
the house of their creditor; and this rule was observed as long as the
ancient forms of procedure were employed. Hence, in our times, anyone
against whom proceedings have been brought in an action on judgment or
to recover the amount of the debt paid by a surety is compelled to
furnish security to satisfy the claim.

​(26) *Pignoris Capio* was employed in some instances through custom,
and in others by virtue of law.

​(27) It was introduced through custom into military affairs; for a
soldier was entitled to employ this proceeding against the paymaster for
his pay, if he did not give it, which compensation was designated *æs
militare*, and he could also distrain for money for the purpose of
purchasing a horse, which was called *æs* *equestre*, as well as for
money with which to purchase barley for his horse which was called *æs
hordiarium*.

​(28) The detention of property in this manner was also legally
authorized, for instance, by the Law of the Twelve Tables against a
party who bought a victim for sacrifice and did not pay for it; and
likewise against one who did not pay the hire of a beast of burden which
he had leased for the purpose of raising money to meet the expenses of a
festival, that is to say, of a sacrifice. In like manner, the right to
distrain was granted by the law of Censors to the farmers of the revenue
of the Roman people, against persons who owed taxes under any law.

​(29) In all these instances the property was seized by the employment
of certain words; and, on this account, it was held by most authorities
that this proceeding was also a form of statute process.

Others, however, were of the contrary opinion; first, because it took
place out of court, that is to say, not in presence of the Prætor, and
usually also during the absence of the adverse party; while, on the
other hand, other actions could not be made use of by any one except in
the presence of both the Prætor, and the adverse party, and besides
property could not be distrained on an unlawful day, that is to say, on
one when it was not permitted to act under the law.

​(30) All these forms of judicial procedure, however, gradually became
unpopular on account of the extreme subtlety of the ancient legal
authorities, so that the result was that anyone who committed the
slightest error lost his case. Hence, by the *Lex Æbutia* and the two
*Leges Julia*, proceedings under this law were abolished, and another
form was substituted for them; so that at present in litigation we make
use of written instructions, that is to say, formulas, for that purpose.

​(31) In only two instances was permission granted to act under the
ancient procedure, that is to say, those of threatened injury, and those
before the Centumviral Tribunal. When application is made to the
*Centumviri*, proceedings are first instituted by the deposit of
forfeits before the Urban or the Foreign Prætor; but in the case of
threatened injury, no one wishes to employ the ancient procedure, but
prefers to bind his adversary by a stipulation provided for in the
Edict; by which means his rights are more conveniently and thoroughly
protected. By the seizure of property as security for debt . . . .^[1]^
it is apparent.

​(32) On the other hand, in the formula provided for the farmer of the
revenue a fiction is inserted, ordering that the debtor be condemned to
pay the same amount of money which he would have been compelled to pay
in order to release his property, if it had been seized as security for
the debt.

​(33) No formula, however, is based on a fiction in a personal action
for recovery; for whether we bring suit for a sum of money, or for any
certain article of property as being due, we assert that the very thing
itself should be transferred to us, and we do not add any fiction for
the purpose of establishing the claim. Therefore, we understand these
formulas to be those by which we allege that a definite sum of money, or
certain specified property, should be transferred to us, and that the
claim is valid by its own force and power. Actions of loan for use,
trust, business transacted, as well as innumerable others are of the
same nature.

​(34) We make use of other fictions in certain formulas, for instance,
when a party who claims possession of the property of an estate brings
an action as a fictitious heir; for as he succeeds to the deceased by
the prætorian, and not by the Civil Law, he is not entitled to a direct
action, and cannot allege that what belongs to the deceased is his; nor
can he demand that what was due to the latter should be paid to him; and
therefore, under the fiction that he is the heir, he asserts his claim
as follows: "Let So-and-So be judge. If Aulus Agerius" (that is to say,
the plaintiff, himself) "should be the heir of Lucius Titius, and it is
found that the land in question ought to belong to him by quiritarian
right;" or if, in the case of a debt, a similar fiction having been
employed by the party, as heir, there is added: "If it should appear
that Numerius Negidius should pay to Aulus Agerius ten thousand
sesterces."

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

​(35) Likewise, the purchaser of the property of a bankrupt estate may
proceed under the fiction that he is the heir, and sometimes he can do
so in a different way; for in his statement of the claim he may mention
the person whose property he purchased and himself in the condemnation;
that is to say, that his adversary may be condemned to pay him on this
account what belonged to the former or was due to him. This species of
proceeding is called Rutilian, because it was devised by the Prætor
Publius Rutilius, who is said to have also introduced the sale of
bankrupt estates. The kind of action mentioned above, by which the
purchaser of the property of an insolvent estate pretends to be the
heir, is called Servian.

​(36) Likewise, there is a pretended usucaption in the action which is
styled Publician. This action is granted to a party who claims property
which has been delivered to him for some legal reason, and of which he
lost possession before obtaining a title to it by usucaption; for
because he cannot claim it as his under quiritarian right, the fiction
is employed that he has acquired it by usucaption and hence, as it were,
to have become its owner, by quiritarian right; for instance, as
follows: "Let So-and-So be judge. If the slave whom Aulus Agerius
purchased and who was delivered to him remained in his possession for a
year, the said slave would then have lawfully belonged to the said Aulus
Agerius by quiritarian right, etc."

​(37) Likewise, Roman citizenship is feigned in the case of an alien, if
he either sues or is sued in an action established by our laws; provided
it is just that the said action may be extended to aliens. For example,
if an alien sues or is sued for theft, or for aiding and abetting theft,
the following formula should be employed, "Let So-and-So be judge. If it
appears that a gold cup was stolen from Lucius Titius by Dio the son of
Hermæus, or with his aid and advice for which he would have been
compelled to make restitution for theft if he had been a Roman citizen,
then let the said Dio, the son of Hermæus be convicted, etc."

Again, if an alien brings the action of theft, or if, under the *Lex
Aquilia* he sues or is sued for damage to property, he can avail himself
of the fiction of Roman citizenship, and judgment can be rendered either
for or against him.

​(38) Moreover, sometimes we may feign that our adversary has not
suffered a loss of civil rights; for if a man or a woman has become
liable to us under a contract, and he or she has afterwards undergone
forfeiture of civil rights — as, for instance, the woman by coemption,
and the man by arrogation — he or she ceases to be indebted to us under
the Civil Law, and we cannot directly claim that either is bound to
transfer anything to us. In order, however, that the party may not have
power to annul our rights, an equitable action is granted against him or
her by a fictitious rescission of the loss of civil rights; that is to
say, one in which it is feigned that the party had not suffered a
disability of this kind.

​(39) The divisions of the Formula are the following, the
*Demonstratio*, the *Intentio*, the *Adjudicatio*, and the
*Condemnatio*.

​(40) The *Demonstratio* is that part of the Formula which designates
the ground on which the case is brought, that is to say, the following
part of the same: "For the reason that Aulus Agerius sold a slave to
Numerius Negidius"; or "For the reason that Aulus Agerius left a slave
in the keeping of Numerius Negidius".

​(41) The *Intentio* is that part of the Formula in which the plaintiff
states his claim; for instance, as follows: "If it appears that Numerius
Negidius should pay ten thousand sesterces to Aulus Agerius"; or,
"Whatever it appears that Numerius Negidius should pay to, or do for,
Aulus Agerius"; likewise, "If it appears that the slave in dispute is
the property of Aulus Agerius, by quiritarian right".

​(42) *Adjudicatio* is that part of the Formula by which the judge is
permitted to assign the property in question to one of the litigants; as
for instance, where an action for the partition of an estate is brought
between co-heirs; one for the division of common property between
partners; one for the establishment of boundaries between neighbors. In
cases of this kind, the following form is employed, namely: "Judge,
award to Titius the amount to which he is entitled."

​(43) *Condemnatio* is that part of the Formula by which authority is
granted to the judge to condemn or discharge the defendant; for
instance, as follows: "Judge, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay ten
thousand sesterces to Aulus Agerius, and if the claim should not be
proved, discharge him." Likewise, as follows: "Judge, condemn Numerius
Negidius to pay to Aulus Agerius not more than ten thousand sesterces,
and if the claim should not be proved, let him be discharged," or, as
follows: "Judge, let Numerius Negidius be condemned to pay to Aulus
Agerius"; etc., without adding the clause, "Not more than ten thousand
sesterces".

​(44) All these divisions are not found together but in every formula;
where some of them appear, others do not, and in fact, sometimes the
*Intentio* exists alone, as in prejudicial formulas, in which the
question is whether a man is a freedman, or what the amount of a dowry
may be, and numerous others. The *Demonstratio*. the *Adjudicatio*, and
the *Condemnatio* are never found alone; for the *Demonstratio* without
the *Intentio* and the *Condemnatio*, is of no effect; and, in like
manner, the *Condemnatio* or the *Adjudicatio* has no force without the
*Intentio*, and for this reason they are never found alone.

​(45) We say that the formulas in which a question of right is involved,
are founded in law; as for instance, when we assert that any property
belongs to us by quiritarian right, or that the adverse party is obliged
to pay us something, or make good a loss to us as a thief, for these
formulas and others are those in which the claim is based on the Civil
Law.

​(46) We say that other formulas are based upon questions of fact, that
is, where a claim of this kind is not made with reference to them; but,
where a fact is stated in the beginning of a formula, words are added by
which authority is given to the judge to condemn or discharge the
defendant. This kind of a formula is employed by a patron against his
freedman, when the latter brings him into court contrary to the Edict of
the Prætor; for then it is in the following terms: "Let Soand-So be
judges. If it is established that such-and-such a patron was brought
into court by such-and-such a freedman, contrary to the edict of
such-and-such a Prætor — judges, condemn the said freedman to pay to the
said patron the sum of ten thousand sesterces. If the case should not be
proved, discharge him."

The other formulas mentioned in the Edict with reference to the
summoning of parties into court, refer to matters of fact; as for
instance, against a person who, having been summoned into court, neither
appeared nor appointed anyone to defend him; and also against one who
rescued by force a party who was summoned to appear; and, in conclusion,
innumerable other formulas of this description are set forth in the
Register of the Prætor.

​(47) In some instances, however, the Prætor permits formulas having
reference to either law or fact to be employed; for example, in actions
of deposit, and loan for use.

The following formula is one of law. "Let So-and-So be judge. Whereas
Aulus Agerius deposited a silver table with Numerius Negidius, for which
this action is brought, whatever Numerius Negidius is obliged to pay to,
or do for, Aulus Agerius, in good faith, on this account, do you, judge,
condemn Numerius Negidius to pay to, or do for Aulus Agerius, unless he
makes restitution; and, if the case should not be proved, let him be
discharged." The following formula: "Let Soand-So be judge. If it
appears that Aulus Agerius deposited a silver table with Numerius
Negidius, and, through the fraud of the said Numerius Negidius, the said
table has not been restored to the said Aulus Agerius, do you, judge,
condemn Numerius Negidius to pay to Aulus Agerius a sum of money equal
to the value of the property, and if the case is not proved let him be
discharged"; is one of fact. Similar formulas are employed in an action
of loan for use.

​(48) The condemnation clause of all formulas has reference to the
pecuniary value of the property. Therefore if we claim any corporeal
property, for instance, land, a slave, a garment, or gold or silver, the
judge condemns the party against whom the suit was brought not to
deliver the very thing itself, as was formerly the practice, but its
estimated value in money.

​(49) The judgment clause of the formula either mentions a certain, or
an uncertain sum of money.

​(50) The mention of a certain sum of money, for example, appears in the
formula by which we demand the payment of a designated amount; for then
the last part of the formula is as follows: "Judge, condemn Numerius
Negidius to pay ten thousand sesterces to Aulus Agerius; and if the case
is not proved, discharge him."

​(51) A judgment for an uncertain sum of money has a two-fold
signification. In the first instance, it is preceded by some restriction
called a limiting clause, as, for instance, where we bring an action for
an uncertain amount; for then in the last part of the formula the
following words are employed: "Judge, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay
not more than ten thousand sesterces to Aulus Agerius; and if the case
should not be proved discharge him." If, however, the amount is
uncertain, and there is no limit; for instance, where we bring suit for
property belonging to us, which is in the possession of another, that is
to say, if we institute proceedings for the production of property in
court, the following words are used: "Judge, condemn Numerius Negidius
to pay to Aulus Agerius a sum of money equal to the value of the
property; and if the case is not proved let him be discharged."

​(52) What then is the rule? If the judge decides against the defendant,
he must require him to pay a certain sum of money even though no
specified amount may have been mentioned in the judgment.

The judge should also be careful that, when a certain sum is stated in
the judgment, not to require the defendant to pay a larger or a smaller
amount, otherwise he makes the case his own. Again, if a limiting clause
was inserted, he must take care not to condemn the defendant in a larger
amount than is mentioned in said clause, otherwise, he will, in like
manner, make the case his own; he is, however, permitted to render a
judgment against him for a smaller sum; and even if there should be no
limiting clause, he can condemn him in any amount that he may wish.

(52a) For the reason that the party who accepts the formula should state
the amount which he claims, the judge is not required to render a decree
for a larger sum; but the plaintiff cannot make use of the same formula
a second time, and he should state in the condemnation the certain sum
of money which he claims, in order that he may not recover less than he
desires.

​(53) If anyone claims more than he is entitled to he will lose his
case, that is to say, he will lose his property, and he cannot obtain
complete restitution through the Prætor; except in certain instances in
which the Prætor does not permit all plaintiffs to suffer loss on
account of their own errors; for he always comes to the relief of minors
under the age of twenty-five years, as in other cases.

(53a) A plaintiff may demand more than he is entitled to in four ways;
in the amount of property, in time, in place, and in the statement of
his cause of action. He does so in the amount of property, if he demands
twenty thousand sesterces, instead of ten thousand which are due to him;
or, if he demands as his own, either the whole, or the greater part of
the property, when he is only a joint owner.

He demands more in point of time, if he asks for payment before the debt
is due.

He demands more in place, for instance, where payment is promised in a
certain place, and he demands that it be made somewhere else, which was
not mentioned in the contract; for example, if I stipulate with you as
follows: "Do you solemnly agree to pay me ten thousand sesterces at
Ephesus?" and afterwards bring suit at Rome under the formula, "If it
appears by the stipulation that you are obliged to pay me ten thousand
sesterces," I am understood to claim more than I am entitled to, for the
reason that in this way I subject the promisor to more inconvenience
than he would suffer if he paid at Ephesus. I can still absolutely
demand payment at Ephesus, for this is not an additional place.

(53b) He demands too much in his statement of his cause of action, if he
deprives the debtor of a choice which he had by the terms of the
contract, for example, if anyone stipulates as follows: "Do you solemnly
agree to either pay ten thousand sesterces, or deliver the slave
Stichus?" as then he can demand either the one or the other. For
although he may demand what is of lesser value, he still is considered
to claim too much, because his adversary may sometimes more conveniently
deliver what is not demanded.

Likewise, if anyone stipulates for a genus, and afterwards claims a
species; for instance, if he stipulates for purple, in general terms,
and afterwards expressly demands Tyrian purple, even though he may
demand that of the least value the same rule will apply, for the reason
which we have just mentioned.

The same rule also applies where anyone stipulates for a slave in
general terms, and afterwards demands a particular slave, for example,
Stichus; although he may be almost worthless. Therefore, the phraseology
of the formula designating the claim must exactly coincide with what was
set forth in the stipulation.

​(54) It is perfectly evident that too large an amount cannot be claimed
by an uncertain formula, because as a definite amount is not demanded,
but it is merely stated that the adversary shall give, or do only what
he is required, no one can claim more. The same principle applies where
a real action is granted to recover an uncertain share of property; as
for example, when a plaintiff demands that there shall be transferred to
him the share of the land in question to which he is entitled, which
kind of action is granted in very few instances.

​(55) It is also evident that if anyone claims one thing instead of
another, he will run no risk, as he can bring another suit, because he
is not considered to have previously done anything which was legal; for
instance, where a party who had a right to claim the slave Stichus,
demands Eros; or where anyone states that he is entitled to property
under a will, when in fact he is entitled to it under the terms of a
stipulation; or where an agent or attorney claims that property should
be transferred to him, instead of to his principal.

​(56) To claim more than one is entitled to, as we have stated above,
involves risk; but anyone is permitted to claim less. He is not
permitted, however, to bring suit to recover the remainder in the
jurisdiction of the same Prætor, for anyone who does so, is barred by
the exception styled the exception against division of actions.

​(57) If more is claimed in the condemnation than is proper, the
plaintiff runs no risk; but as the defendant has made use of a formula
which was unjust, he may obtain complete restitution, in order that the
amount of the judgment may be reduced. If, however, less be set out in
the condemnation than the plaintiff has a right to, he only obtains the
amount which he sued for, as the entire claim was brought into court,
and he will be limited by the amount stated in the condemnation which
the judge cannot exceed. In a case of this kind the Prætor does not
grant complete restitution, for he more readily comes to the relief of
defendants than plaintiffs. We, however, except minors under the age of
twenty-five years, for the Prætor always comes to the relief of such
persons, where loss of property has been sustained by them.

​(58) Where more or less than is due is set forth in the *Demonstratio*,
no case is brought into court, and hence the matter remains unaltered;
and this is what is meant when it is said that a right is not
extinguished by a false statement of the cause of action.

​(59) Still, there are some authorities, who hold that less than is due
may be properly included in the *Demonstratio*; so that a party who has
purchased both Stichus and Eros, is considered to have properly stated
his cause of action as follows: "Whereas I purchased the slave Eros from
you"; and, if he desires to do so, he may bring an action for the
recovery of Stichus by means of another formula; because it is true that
anyone who purchased both slaves also purchased each of them; and this
was especially the opinion of Labeo. If, however, he who purchased one
of them, should bring an action to recover both, he makes a full
statement of his cause of action. The same rule is applicable to other
actions, for instance, to those of Loan for Use, and Deposit.

​(60) We have found it stated in certain writers that, in the action of
Deposit — and indeed in all others in which, the condemned party is
branded with infamy — anyone who demands more than he is entitled to in
the statement of his cause of action, will lose his case; for instance,
where he who had deposited one article, alleges in his statement that he
had deposited two; or where he who was struck on the cheek with the
fist, states in an action for injury sustained that he was also struck
in some other part of the body. Let us carefully examine whether we
should hold this opinion to be correct.

It is true that there are two formulas employed in the Action of
Deposit, one based upon the law and the other upon fact, as we mentioned
above. The one based on the law, in the first place, designates the
cause of action in the manner in which this is usually done, and then
sets out the claim as being based upon the law in the following terms:
"Whatever the defendant should, on this account, give or perform." But
in the formula based upon fact, the cause of action is set forth in the
beginning without any previous statement, as follows, "If it appears
that So-and-So deposited such-and-such property with Soand-So"; we
should entertain no doubt that if anyone in a formula based on fact
alleges that he has deposited more articles than was actually the case
he will lose his suit, because he is considered to have included in his
claim more than he was entitled to. . . .^[1]^

​(61) Set-offs frequently take place in such a way that each party
receives less than he would otherwise be entitled to. For, as in *bona
fide* actions, the judge is considered to have full power to estimate
how much should justly and properly be paid to the plaintiff; on the
other

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

hand, he also has authority to determine how much the plaintiff should
pay in the same case, and to render judgment against the defendant for
the remainder.

​(62) *Bona fide* actions are such as the following: purchase and sale;
leasing and hiring; the transaction of the business of others without
authority; deposit; trust; partnership; guardianship; dotal property.

​(63) The judge also has a right not to consider any set-off, at all, as
he is not expressly directed to do so by the terms of the formula; but,
for the reason that this seems to be proper in a *bona fide* action, it
is therefore held to be part of his duty.

​(64) The case of an action brought by a banker is different, for he is
compelled to take account of a set-off, and to mention it in his
statement; and to such an extent is this true, that he must make
allowance for it in the first place, and only demand that the remainder
shall be paid to him. For example, if he owes ten thousand sesterces to
Titius, and Titius owes him twenty thousand, he should state his claim
as follows: "If it appears that Titius owes him ten thousand sesterces
more than he owes Titius."

​(65) Again, the purchaser of the estate of a bankrupt is directed to
make a deduction when he brings his action, so that his adversary will
only have judgment rendered against him for the balance which remains
after having deducted what the purchaser of the estate owes the
defendant on account of the insolvent debtor.

​(66) Between the set-off which is made against the claim of the banker,
and the deduction to be taken from the claim of the purchaser of a
bankrupt estate, there is this difference, namely: that property of the
same kind and nature is only included in the set-off; as for instance,
money is set-off against money; wheat against wheat; wine against wine;
and it is even held by some authorities that wine cannot be set off
against wine, or wheat against wheat, unless it is of the same nature
and quality. In making the deduction, however, property is included
which is not of the same kind. Hence, if the purchaser of the estate of
a bankrupt brings an action for money due the latter, and he himself
owes a certain quantity of grain or wine, after it has been deducted,
suit shall be brought only for the remainder, whatever it may be.

​(67) Deduction is also made of what will be due hereafter at a certain
time, but set-off only takes place where the debt is already due.

​(68) Moreover, the amount of the set-off is inserted in the statement
of the claim, the result of which is that if the banker demands in the
set-off a single sesterce more than he is entitled to, he will lose his
case, and therefore his property as well. The deduction, however, is
inserted in the judgment, in which place the claimant does not run any
risk, for demanding too much; especially when the purchaser of a
bankrupt estate brings a suit in which, although he makes a claim for a
certain amount of money, he, nevertheless, sets out an uncertain amount
in the condemnation.

​(69) For the reason that we have previously mentioned the action
brought against the *peculium* of sons under parental control and
slaves, it is necessary for us to more clearly explain this, as well as
the other actions, which are ordinarily brought against parents and
masters, on account of their sons and slaves.

​(70) In the first place, if a transaction was entered into with a son
or a slave, by order of his father or his master, the Prætor will grant
an action for the entire amount against the father or the master; and
this is proper, because anyone who enters into a transaction of this
kind takes into consideration their responsibility rather than that of
the son, or the slave.

​(71) For the same reason the Prætor grants two other actions, the
*Actio Exercitoria*, and the *Actio Institoria*. The first will lie
where the father or the master places his son or his slave in charge of
a ship, and any business on this account is transacted by the party in
charge. For whenever a debt has been contracted with the consent of the
father or master, it appears to be perfectly just that an action for the
entire amount should be granted against him. And even though a person
appoints as the master of a ship either a slave belonging to another, or
a freeman, the prætorian action will, nevertheless, be granted against
him. This action is called "*Exercitoria*," for the reason that the
party who obtains the daily returns from the ship is called
"*Exercitor*."

The Institorial Formula is employed when anyone places his son or slave,
or the slave of another or a freeman, in charge of his shop, or of any
kind of business whatsoever; and where the party placed in charge of the
same contracts any debt which has reference to the said business. It is
called "*Institoria*," for the reason that the party placed in charge of
a shop is called "*Institor*"; and this formula is made use of for the
collection of the entire amount which is due.

​(72) In addition to these, the *Actio Tributoria* has been established
against a father or a master, when his son or slave transacts some
business with his *peculium*, with the knowledge of his father or his
master. For if any contract having reference to said property should be
made with either of them, the Prætor directs that whatever was invested
in the said business, or any profits derived from the same, shall be
distributed between the father or master, if anything is due to them,
and among any other creditors, in proportion to their respective claims;
and for the reason that he permits the distribution to be made to the
father, or the master, if any creditor should complain of having
received less than he was entitled to, he enables him to bring this
action which is called "*Tributoria*."

​(73) Moreover, the action *De Peculio* was introduced where any
advantage accrued to the father, or the master; and although the
business may have been transacted without the consent of either of them,
still, whatever was expended for the benefit of their property should be
paid in full; or if it was not expended for that purpose, payment should
be made to the amount of the value of the *peculium*. It is supposed to
have been expended for the benefit of the master's property

if the slave should have disbursed anything necessarily for the
advantage of his master; for instance, if he should pay borrowed money
to his creditors; or should prop up buildings which are about to fall;
or should purchase grain for his household; or should buy a tract of
land, or any other property which it was necessary to acquire.
Therefore, for example, if out of ten sesterces which your slave
borrowed from Titius, he should pay five to your creditor, and should
expend the remaining five in any way whatsoever, you ought to have
judgment rendered against you for five, and for the other five to the
amount of the *peculium*.

From this it is apparent that if all of the ten sesterces were employed
for the benefit of your property, Titius can recover the entire ten;
for, although there is but one action having reference to the *peculium*
to recover what was used for the benefit of the property of the father,
or the master, still, he has the right to two judgments; and, therefore,
the judge before whom the action is brought, should investigate in the
first place, whether the expenditure was made for the benefit of the
property of the father, or master; and should not pass to the estimation
of amount of the *peculium*, unless either nothing was understood to
have been expended for the benefit of the property of the father, or
master, or that not all of it was so employed; as, when the estimate is
made of the amount of the *peculium*, that should previously be deducted
which is due to the father or the master, by the son, or the slave who
is under his control; and the remainder shall only be considered as
*peculium*. Sometimes, however, the amount due by the son, or the slave,
as aforesaid, is not deducted from the *peculium*; for instance, if he
who owes it himself forms a part of the said *peculium*.

​(74) But there is no doubt that either the *Actio Exercitoria*, or the
*Actio Institoria* will lie in favor of anyone who has entered into a
contract with a son or a slave, by the order of his father or master;
and that he can bring the action of *peculium*, or that based on the
employment of property for the benefit of another. No one, however, when
he could undoubtedly obtain the whole amount of the debt by means of
either of the above mentioned actions, would be so foolish as to take
the trouble to prove that the party with whom he contracted had a
*peculium*, and that his claim could be satisfied out of it; or that the
money which he demanded had been employed for the benefit of the father,
or master.

(74a) Again, he who is entitled to bring the *Actio Tributoria,*can also
bring the *Actio de Peculio*, as well as the one for the recovery of
money employed for the benefit of another: and it will generally be more
advantageous for him to make use of this action than of the *Actio
Tributoria*, for in the latter only the account of the *peculium* is
considered which the son, or the slave made use of in the business in
which he was engaged, and the profits of the same; in the *Actio de
Peculio,*however, the entire *peculium* is involved; and anyone may
transact business with a third or a fourth of it, or even with a smaller
portion, and have the greater part of his *peculium* otherwise invested.
This is even more true, and he should certainly have recourse to this
action if it can be proved that what the party who contracted with the
son or the slave gave was used for the benefit of the father or the
master; for, as we stated above, the same formula is employed both in
the action having reference to the *peculium*, and in the one to recover
property used for the benefit of another.

​(75) Noxal actions are granted on account of offences committed by sons
under paternal control, or by slaves; as, for instance, where they
commit theft or injury; so that the father or master is permitted either
to pay the damages assessed, or to surrender the culprit by way of
reparation; for it would be unjust for the misconduct of a son or a
slave to cause any loss to his parent, or his master, except by the
forfeiture of the body of the son or the slave.

​(76) Moreover, noxal actions were established either by law or by the
Edict of the Prætor; by law, for instance, in the action of theft under
the provision of the Twelve Tables; the action for wrongful damage by
the *Lex Aquilia*; the action for injury, and that for property taken
with violence by the Edict of the Prætor.

​(77) All noxal actions follow the person of the culprit. Hence, if your
son, or your slave commits a wrongful act while he is under your
control, an action will lie against you; if he conies under the power of
another, an action can be brought against the latter; if he becomes his
own master, a direct action can be brought against him, and his
surrender by way of reparation is extinguished.

On the other hand, a direct action may become a noxal one; for if the
head of a household commits a wrongful act and he gives himself in
arrogation to you, or becomes your slave; what we stated in the First
Commentary might happen in certain cases takes place; that is to say, a
noxal action can be brought against you, when, formerly, a direct action
would lie against the offender himself.

​(78) If, however, a son commits a wrongful act against his father, or a
slave against his master, no right of action will arise; for no
obligation can, under any circumstances, be created between me and one
who is under my control. Hence, although he may pass under the control
of another, or becomes his own master, an action will lie neither
against himself, nor against the party under whose control he now is.
Therefore, the question arises where the son or the slave of another
commits a wrongful act against me, and subsequently is subjected to my
authority; whether, on this account the action is extinguished, or
remains in suspense. Our preceptors hold that it is extinguished,
because conditions have become such that it cannot be brought; and,
therefore, if the party should be freed from my control, I cannot bring
suit.

The authorities of the other school are of the opinion that as long as
he is in my power, the action remains in suspense, for the reason that I
cannot sue myself; but that when he is no longer subject to my authority
the action is revived.

​(79) Moreover, when a son under paternal control is transferred by
mancipation, on account of some wrongful act which he has committed, the
authorities of the other school think that he should be sold three
times, because it is provided by the Law of the Twelve Tables that a son
cannot be released from the authority of his father unless he has been
three times sold. Sabinus, Cassius, and the other authorities of our
school, however, hold that one sale is sufficient, and that the three
mentioned by the Law of the Twelve Tables only refer to voluntary sales.

​(80) So much with reference to those persons who are under the control
of their fathers and masters whether the controversy relates to their
contracts, or their crimes. But with reference to such persons as are in
hand, or are liable to mancipation, the law is said to be that when an
action founded on contract is brought against them, unless they are
defended against the entire amount by the party to whose authority they
are subject, any property which would be theirs, if they had not been
under control, shall be sold. When, however, their forfeiture of civil
rights having been rescinded, an action based on the judicial power of
the magistrate is brought against them and is not defended, the woman
herself can be sued, while she is in the hand of her husband, because,
in this instance the authority of the guardian is not necessary. . .
.^[1]^

​(81) What course then should be pursued? Although we stated that it was
not permitted to surrender dead persons by way of reparation for the
commission of a wrongful act; still, if anyone should surrender the body
of such a person who had died, he will (be) legally released from
liability.

​(82) In the next place we should note that we can either sue in our own
names, or in that of another, as for instance, our agent, attorney,
guardian, or curator, while formerly, when the *legis actionis* were
employed, a man could not bring an action in the name of another, except
in certain cases.

​(83) Moreover, the attorney in an action is appointed by prescribed
forms of words in the presence of the adverse party. The plaintiff
appoints an attorney as follows: "Whereas, I am bringing an action
against you (for example) to recover a certain tract of land; I appoint
Lucius Titius my attorney against you in this matter." The adverse party
makes his appointment as follows: "Whereas, you have brought an action
against me to recover a tract of land, I appoint Publius Mævius my
attorney against you in this matter." The plaintiff may make use of the
following words: "Whereas, I desire to bring an action against you, I
appoint Lucius Titius my attorney in this matter." The defendant says:
"Whereas, you desire to bring an action against me, I appoint Publius
Mævius my attorney in this matter."

It makes no difference whether the attorney appointed is present, or
absent; but if an absent person is appointed, he will only become the
attorney if he accepts and undertakes the duties of the office.

​(84) An agent, however, is substituted in the case without the use of
any special forms of words, merely by mandate alone, and his appointment
can be made during the absence, and without the knowledge of the adverse
party. Moreover, there are some authorities who hold that one can become
an agent, without having been directed to do so,

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

provided he attends to the business in good faith, and gives security
that his principal will ratify his acts; although he to whom the mandate
was given is generally required to furnish security, because the mandate
is frequently concealed in the beginning of the proceedings and is
afterwards disclosed in court.

​(85) We have stated in the First Commentary in what manner guardians
and curators are appointed.

​(86) He who brings an action in the name of another makes the claim in
the name of his principal, and mentions his own name in the
condemnation. If, for instance, Lucius Titius brings suit for Publius
Mævius, the formula is in the following words: "If it appears that
Numerius Negidius should pay to Publius Mævius ten thousand sesterces,
Judge, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay ten thousand sesterces to Lucius
Titius, and if his indebtedness should not be established discharge him
from liability." Again, in a real action, the claim is made that the
property belongs to Publius Mævius by quiritarian right, and the
representative is mentioned in the condemnation.

​(87) When anyone intervenes in behalf of the party against whom the
action is brought, and the claim is made that "the principal should make
payment," the condemnation is stated in the name of the representative
of the party sued. In the case of a real action, however, the name of
the party defendant is not mentioned in the claim, either when he
appears in person, or by a representative; for the claim merely states
that the property in question belongs to the plaintiff.

​(88) Let us now consider under what circumstances either the defendant
or the plaintiff may be compelled to give security.

​(89) Hence, for example, if I bring a real action against you, you
should furnish me security, for it appears to be but just as you are
permitted to retain possession of the property, and it is doubtful
whether it belongs to you, or not, that you should give security that if
you are defeated, and do not restore the property itself, or refuse to
pay its value, I may have the power to proceed against you, or your
sponsors.

​(90) There is all the more reason that you should furnish me security,
if you are acting as the representative of another in the case.

​(91) Moreover, a real action is of a twofold nature; for it is either
brought by a formula stating the claim, or by one based on a solemn
engagement; and, if it is made in the manner first mentioned, the
stipulation called "security for the payment of a judgment" will apply;
but if it is based on a solemn engagement, that form of stipulation
styled "security for the property in dispute and the profits derived
from the same," is the one made use of.

​(92) The formula which states the claim contains the allegation of the
plaintiff that the property belongs to him.

​(93) In the proceeding based upon a solemn engagement, we proceed as
follows, and we make this demand upon the adverse party:'"If the slave
in dispute is mine by quiritarian right, do you promise to pay me
twenty-five sesterces?" And then we state the formula by which we claim
that the sum mentioned in the promise should be paid to us; but we can
only gain our case by means of this formula if we prove that the
property is ours.

​(94) The sum mentioned in the promise is not exacted, for it is not
penal, but merely prejudicial, and is used only for the purpose of
deciding the right to the property; therefore even the party against
whom the action is brought does not make another stipulation with the
plaintiff. Moreover, this kind of a stipulation instead of security for
the property in dispute and for the profits of the same, was so called
because it took the place of personal sureties who formerly, when
proceedings were instituted under the *legis actiones*, were given by
the party in possession to the plaintiff, for the restoration of the
property itself and the mesne profits of the same.

​(95) When, however, the suit is brought before the *Centumviri*, we do
not demand the sum mentioned in the solemn engagement, by the formula,
but under the ancient form of procedure; for then we challenge the
defendant by the deposit, and the promise of a hundred and twenty-five
sesterces is made by virtue of the *Lex* . . . .^[1]^

​(96) If a party brings a real action in his own name, he does not
furnish security.

​(97) And even if an action is brought by an agent, no security is
required from him, or his principal, for he has been substituted for his
principal by a prescribed and, as it were, solemn form of words; and he
is very properly considered to occupy the place of his principal.

​(98) If, however, an agent brings the action, he is ordered to give
security that his principal will ratify his acts; for there is danger
that, otherwise, the principal might bring a second action with
reference to the same property, which danger does not exist where the
suit was brought by an agent; for the reason that anyone who sues by an
agent has no greater right of action than if he brought the suit
himself.

​(99) The terms of the Edict compel guardians and curators to furnish
security in the same way as agents; sometimes, however, they are not
required to do so.

​(100) So much with reference to real actions. In the case of personal
actions, when inquiry is made now and when security should be furnished
by the plaintiff, we repeat what we have already said with reference to
real actions.

​(101) But with respect to the party against whom the action is brought,
where anyone intervenes in his behalf, he must, by all means, furnish
security, for the reason that no one is understood to be a proper
defender of another's affairs without security. If the action is brought
against an attorney, his principal is required to furnish security, but
if brought against an agent, the latter must furnish it himself. The
same rule applies to guardians and curators.

​(102) If, however, a party undertakes his own defence in a personal
action he usually gives security to pay the judgment, in certain

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

cases which are indicated by the Prætor. In these cases there are two
reasons why security is exacted; for this is either done on account of
the nature of the action, or because the character of the defendant is
suspicious. It is required on account of the nature of the action, for
instance, where it is one to compel the payment of a judgment, or to
collect money expended for a principal; or where the morals of a wife
are involved. It is required on account of the suspicious character of
the defendant, where he has squandered his property; or his creditors
have obtained possession of it, or advertised it for sale; or when
proceedings have been instituted against an heir whom the Prætor
considers liable to suspicion.

​(103) Actions are either founded upon law, or are derived from the
authority of a magistrate.

​(104) Actions founded upon law are those which are brought in the City
of Rome, or within the first mile-stone from that city, between Roman
citizens before a single judge. Those brought under the *Lex Julia
Judiciaria* expire after the lapse of a year and six months, unless they
have been previously decided; and this is the reason why it is commonly
stated that under the *Lex Julia* a case dies after a year and six
months have elapsed.

​(105) Actions derived from the authority of a magistrate are those
brought before several judges, or before a single judge, if either the
latter or one of the litigants is an alien. These actions belong to the
same class as those which are brought beyond the first mile-stone from
the City of Rome; whether the parties litigant are Roman citizens or
aliens. Cases of this kind are said to be derived from the authority of
the magistrate, for the reason that the proceedings are only valid as
long as he who directed them to be instituted retains his office.

​(106) Where an action is brought under the authority of a magistrate,
whether it is real or personal, or whether it was based upon a formula
of fact, or a statement of law, it is not by operation of law a bar to
subsequent proceedings having reference to the same matter, and
therefore it is necessary to plead an exception on the ground that a
decision has already been rendered, or that issue has been joined in the
case.

​(107) If, however, a personal action based on a legal statement has
been brought by the formula relating to claims under the Civil Law, an
action cannot subsequently be maintained with reference to the same
matter by operation of law, and for this reason an exception will be
superfluous. If, however, a real action, or an equitable personal action
based upon fact, should be brought, proceedings may nevertheless
subsequently be instituted, by operation of law; and on this account an
exception on the ground that the question has already been decided, or
that issue has been joined, will be necessary.

​(108) The rule was formerly different when the ancient method to
procedure was employed, for when proceedings concerning a matter had
once been instituted, no legal action could be taken with reference to
it, nor was the employment of exceptions in those times customary, as it
is now.

​(109) Moreover, an action may be founded upon law, and yet not be
legal; and, on the other hand, it may not be founded upon law, but still
be legal. For example, proceedings based upon the *Lex Aquilia,
Publilia*, or *Furia*, when instituted in the provinces, are derived
from the authority of the magistrate, and the rule is the same if we
bring an action before several judges, or before a single judge if one
of the parties is an alien; and, on the other hand, if an action in
which all the parties are Roman citizens is brought at Rome before a
single judge, for the same cause for which a right of action is granted
to us by the Prætor, it will be legal.

​(110) In this place we should note that those actions which are based
upon a statute or a decree of the Senate are usually granted by the
Prætor in perpetuity; but that those which are dependent upon the
jurisdiction of the Prætor himself are only granted within a year from
the time when the cause of action arose.

​(111) Sometimes, however, he also grants such actions in perpetuity,
as, for instance, those in which the Civil Law is imitated; such as the
actions which he grants to the prætorian possessors of estates, and to
other persons who occupy the place of an heir. The action of manifest
theft, although it is derived from the jurisdiction of the Prætor
himself, is granted without limitation of time, and this is reasonable,
as a pecuniary penalty has been established instead of a capital one.

​(112) All actions which lie against anyone, either by operation of law,
or because they are granted by the Prætor, do not also lie against his
heir, nor are usually granted by the Prætor; for this rule is so
positive that penal actions arising from criminal offences do not lie,
and are not usually granted against an heir; as, for instance, the
action of theft, of the robbery of property by violence, or of injury,
or of unlawful damage.

Actions of this kind will, however, lie in favor of heirs, and will not
be refused them by the Prætor, with the exception of the action for
injury, and any other of the same description if it can be found.

​(113) Sometimes, however, even an action based upon a contract will not
lie for or against an heir; since the heir of a joint stipulator has no
right of action, and the heir of a sponsor or guarantor is not liable.

​(114) It remains for us to consider whether, if the party against whom
the action was brought before judgment had been rendered but after issue
had been joined, should satisfy the plaintiff, what course the judge
should pursue; whether he has authority to discharge him from liability,
or whether he should rather decide against him for the reason that at
the time of the joinder of issue he was in such a position that he
should have been condemned. Our preceptors think that he should be
discharged, and that it makes no difference what kind of a judgment is
rendered; and this is the reason why it is commonly said that it was the
opinion of Sabinus and Cassius that a discharge from liability could be
granted in all actions.

The authorities of the other school agree in this point with reference
to *bona fide* actions; because in cases of this kind no restraint is
placed upon the judge; and their opinion is the same with reference to
real actions, for the reason that there is an express provision of this
kind stated in the terms of the formula, so that if the defendant should
restore the property he shall be discharged from liability. This, of
course, applies where the action was brought under the formula making
the claim, in which the party is sued in such a way that the property is
dispute is demanded, and the words above referred to are repeated in the
beginning of the condemnation; for sometimes . . . .^[1]^ personal
actions of this kind are brought in which it is not permitted ... .^[1]^

​(115) In the next place let us examine exceptions.^[2]^

​(116) Exceptions have been introduced for the purpose of defending
those against whom actions have been brought; for it often happens that
a party is liable by the Civil Law, when it would be unjust for a
judgment to be rendered against him.

For example, if I stipulate for a sum of money from you on account of my
having advanced it to you, when I never did so; as it is certain that I
can bring an action against you for the money and you would be obliged
to pay it as you are liable under the stipulation, but because it would
be unjust for judgment to be rendered against you on this account, it is
settled that you can defend yourself by the exception on the ground of
fraud.

Likewise, if I make an informal agreement with you not to bring suit for
a debt which you owe me; I can nevertheless, bring an action against you
for the amount, and you will be obliged to pay me because the obligation
is not extinguished by a mere agreement, but if I should sue you, it is
established that you can bar me by an exception on the ground of an
agreement entered into.

​(117) Again, exceptions can be pleaded in actions which are not
personal; for example, if you compel me through fear, or induce me
through fraud, to sell any property to you, and then you sue me for the
said property, an exception will be granted me by which you will be
barred, if I can prove that you have been guilty of intimidation or
fraud.

Likewise, if knowing that a case involving the title to a tract of land
was pending in court, and you buy the land from a party who is not in
possession, and claim it from one who is in possession, an exception can
be pleaded against you by which you will be absolutely barred.

^[1]^ Original copy illegible.

^[2]^ The *exceptio*, or exception, was the answer of the defendant, and
while by means of it he could traverse the plaintiff's allegations, this
was not usually done; but the practice was to set forth circumstances,
which, if they did not directly contravene the statements of the
plaintiff — and they even sometimes admitted them — rendered these of no
effect, by alleging bad faith, fraud, or flagrant injustice. Hence the
*exceptio* almost exactly coincided with the English plea of confession
and avoidance. — ed.

​(118) The Prætor mentions other exceptions in his Edict, and he grants
still others after having taken cognizance of the case. All of them are
either based upon law or what is equivalent to it, or they are derived
from the jurisdiction of the Prætor.

​(119) Moreover, all exceptions are drawn up in language which is the
opposite of what the party against whom the action is brought alleges.
For if the defendant states that the plaintiff is guilty of fraud, for
the reason that he brings suit for money which he never advanced, the
exception is stated in the following words: "If in this matter no fraud
was, or is committed by Aulus Agerius."

Likewise, if he states that the action was brought in opposition to an
agreement not to demand the money, it is set forth as follows: "If it
was not agreed between Aulus Agerius and Numerius Negidius that the said
money should not be demanded"; and similar terms are ordinarily employed
in other cases. Hence, because every exception is an objection made by
the defendant but is inserted in the formula in such a way as to render
the condemnation conditional, that is, the judge must not condemn the
defendant unless no fraud was committed by the plaintiff with reference
to the matter in question, the judge shall not render a decree against
him if no informal agreement^[1]^ was entered into not to bring suit to
recover the money.

​(120) Exceptions are said to be either peremptory or dilatory.

​(121) Peremptory exceptions are those which are always valid, and
cannot be avoided; for instance, the exception on the ground of
intimidation or fraud, or of a violation of the law; or of a decree of
the Senate; or because the case has already been decided; or that issue
has been joined; or that an informal agreement was entered into "that
suit should not, under any circumstances, be brought to recover the
money.

​(122) Dilatory exceptions are such as are only valid for a time; for
instance, the exception based on an informal agreement that suit shall
not be brought within five years, and after that time has expired the
exception cannot be pleaded. The exception of a divided claim, or that
of a residual claim, is similar to this; for if anyone brings an action
for a part of a debt, and should then bring another for the remainder in
the same prætorship, he will be barred by the exception which is called
that of a divided claim. In like manner, if one who has several claims
against the same person brings suit on some of them, and defers doing so
with reference to the remainder in order that they may be brought before
other judges, and he then brings an action within the same prætorship,
to recover those which he postponed, he will be barred by the exception
styled that of a residual claim.

​(123) It should be observed, however, that the party against whom a
dilatory exception may be pleaded ought to defer his action, other-

^[1]^ *Pactum conventum*. An agreement of this kind was not absolutely
binding unless authorized by the Prætor who, however, rarely refused his
sanction. When this was obtained, no difference existed between this
kind of obligation and the *contractus*, or formal convention, so far as
their legal requirements were concerned. — ed.

wise, if he proceeds and the exception be pleaded against him, he will
lose his claim; as if issue had been joined, and his case has been lost
by this exception, he has no longer any power to sue after the time
during which, if matters had remained unchanged, he could have avoided
the effect of the exception.

​(124) Exceptions are understood to be dilatory not only with reference
to time, but also with regard to persons; and to this class belong those
which are connected with the position of attorney; for instance, where a
party who, under the terms of the Edict, has no right to appoint an
attorney acts through one; or, if he has a right to appoint an attorney,
but appoints one who is not legally qualified to undertake the duties of
the *office*. If the exception to an attorney is pleaded, and the party
himself is such a person that he cannot appoint an attorney, he himself
can bring the action; if, however, the attorney is not permitted to
assume the duties of the office, his principal has the power to bring
the suit, either by another attorney, or in his own proper person, and
he can, in either one of these ways, avoid the exception; but if he
should pay no attention to this disability, and conduct the case by the
attorney he will lose it.

​(125) If the defendant, through mistake, should not avail himself of a
peremptory exception, he can obtain complete restitution, by adding the
exception to the pleadings; but if he should not make use of a dilatory
exception, it is a question whether he will be entitled to complete
restitution.

​(126) It sometimes happens that an exception which, at first sight,
appears to be just, will cause injury to the plaintiff, and when this is
the case an addition is required to the pleadings for the purpose of
affording protection to the plaintiff, which addition is called a
*Replicatio*, because by means of it the force of the exception is
weakened and destroyed. If, for example, I made an informal agreement
with you not to sue you for money which you owe me, and afterwards we
entered into a contrary agreement, that is to say, that I might be
permitted to sue you, and then if I do sue you, you plead the exception
against me that judgment should only be rendered against you where no
agreement had been made that I should not bring suit for the money, this
exception on the ground of an informal agreement prejudices my claim, as
the first agreement still retains its force, even though we made a
contrary one subsequently; but because it is unjust for me to be barred
by an exception, a replication based on the subsequent agreement is
granted me as follows: "If no agreement was entered into afterwards that
I might be permitted to bring an action to recover the money."

(126a) Likewise, if a banker brings suit for the price of property sold
at auction, the exception may be pleaded against him that judgment is
only to be rendered against the purchaser where the property which he
bought had been delivered; and this is apparently a just exception. If,
however, the condition was imposed at the auction that the property
should not be delivered to the purchaser until he had paid the price of
the same, the broker can make use of the following rep-

lication: "Or if it was previously stated at the sale that the property
would not be delivered to the purchaser before he paid the purchase
money."

​(127) Sometimes, however, it happens that a replication which, at first
sight, appears to be equitable, unjustly inflicts an injury on the
defendant; and when this takes place, an addition to the pleadings is
required for the purpose of protecting the defendant, which is styled
*Duplicatio*.

​(128) Again, if this, though it appears at first sight to be just, for
some reason or other injures the plaintiff, another addition to the
pleadings is required by which the plaintiff may be protected, and this
is called a *Triplicatio*.

​(129) Sometimes the multiplicity of affairs requires the use of
additional exceptions to those which we have already mentioned.^[1]^

​(130) Let us now consider Prescriptions,^[2]^ which have been adopted
for the benefit of the plaintiff.

​(131) For it is frequently the case that, under the same obligation a
party is required to do something for us at present, and something more
at a future time. For instance, where we have stipulated for the payment
of a certain sum of money every year, or every month, and, at the end of
the year or month, a sum of money is required to be paid to us for this
time; and with reference to years to come, although an obligation is
understood to have been contracted, the time of payment has not yet
arrived. Therefore, if we desire to bring an action to recover what is
now due, and to proceed to joinder of issue and leave the future
discharge of the obligation unimpaired, it is necessary, when we bring
suit, to make use of the following prescription: "Let the proceedings
have reference only to what is at present due." Otherwise, if we bring
suit without making use of this prescription, under the formula by which
we sue for an uncertain amount, the statement of the claim is expressed
as follows: "Whatever it appears that Numerius Negidius should transfer
to, or do for Aulus Agerius," brings the entire obligation, that is to
say, also what is due in the future, into court; and no matter what may
be due hereafter it cannot be collected, nor can an action subsequently
be brought to recover the remainder.

(131a) Likewise, where for example, we bring an action on purchase, in
order that land may be conveyed to us by sale, we must state the
prescription as follows: "Let the proceedings only have reference to the
sale of the land"; and, afterwards, if we desire vacant posses-

^[1]^ These terms and the order of their employment are strongly
suggestive of the ancient forms of Common Law pleading, the Reply,
Rejoinder, Surrejoinder, Rebutter and Surrebutter. Under both the Roman
and English systems, the pleadings could be indefinitely multiplied,
until joinder of issue was attained, but it was not customary to extend
them beyond the *Triplicatio*, or Surrejoinder. — ed.

^[2]^ *Præscriptio*. This was equivalent to an exception, or a demurrer,
which took the place of the *Demonstratio*, and was inserted in the
beginning of the Formula. It was subsequently known as the *Actio
Præscriptis Verbis*, and operated as a limitation of the right of
action. To have legal effect, it was essential that it should be
specially pleaded. — ed.

sion be delivered to us, we will be entitled to an action under the
stipulation, or to one under the contract of purchase to compel its
delivery. If we neglect to make use of this prescription, the obligation
of our entire right embraced in the uncertain claim: "Whatever on this
account Numerius Negidius. should give to, or do for Aulus Agerius," is
disposed of by the statement of the claim in the former suit; so that
afterwards we will not be entitled to any action to any action to compel
the delivery of vacant possession, if we should desire to bring one.

​(132) Prescriptions are so called for the reason that they precede the
formulas, which fact is perfectly obvious.

​(133) At the present time, however, as we mentioned above, all
prescriptions proceed from the plaintiff, while formerly some of them
were pleaded in behalf of the defendant, as for instance, the following
prescription: "Let this point be determined, if it does not prejudice
the estate"; which is now changed into a species of exception, and is
used when the claimant of the estate prejudices the right to the same by
bringing another kind of action, for example, if he brings suit for
certain articles belonging to the estate; for it would be unjust to
render the result of an action involving the entire estate dependent
upon a decision having reference to only a portion of the same . . .
.^[1]^

​(134) If suit is brought under a stipulation entered into by a slave,
and the *Intentio* states to whom the amount is to be paid, that is to
say, that what the slave stipulated for should be paid to his master;
the allegations in the prescription should be true in accordance with
their natural meaning.

​(135) Moreover, what we have said with reference to slaves we
understand to be applicable to all other persons subject to our
authority.

​(136) Again, we should observe that when we bring an action against a
party who promised something which was uncertain, the formula should be
drawn up so as to include a prescription, instead of a statement of the
cause of action, as follows: "Let So-and-So be judge. For the reason
that Aulus Agerius stipulated for something uncertain from Numerius
Negidius, payment of which is now due, whatever on this account Numerius
Negidius should transfer to, or do for, Aulus Agerius, etc."

​(137) When an action is brought against a sponsor or surety, it is the
practice, in the case of the sponsor, to employ the following form of
prescription: "Let the action be tried on the ground that Aulus Agerius
stipulated for something of uncertain amount from Lucius Titius, for
which Numerius Negidius is sponsor for the amount which is now due." In
the case of a surety, the following form is employed: "Let the case be
tried on the ground that Numerius Negidius became surety for Lucius
Titius for an uncertain amount, which is now due"; and then the formula
is added.^[2]^

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

^[2]^ The Formulary System of the Romans contributed much of value and
importance to both the principles and forms of the Common Law. The
maxims of

​(138) It remains for us to examine interdicts.

​(139) The Prætor, or the Proconsul, interposes his authority directly
in certain cases for the purpose of putting an end to controversies.
This he especially does when there is a dispute between the parties with
reference to possession or quasi possession; and, in short, he either
orders something to be done, or forbids it to be done. Moreover, the
formulas and the clauses made use of in this proceeding are styled
interdicts and decrees.

​(140) They are called decrees when he commands something to be done,
for instance when he directs that something be produced in court, or
restored; they are called interdicts when he forbids something to be
done; for instance when he directs that no violence be employed against
the party who is in possession without any defect; or that nothing be
done on consecrated ground. Hence, all interdicts have reference to
restitution, production, or prohibition.

​(141) Still, when he orders that something shall be done, or prohibits
some act from being performed, the affair is not immediately concluded,
but recourse is had to one or more judges, and the formulas having been
issued, an inquiry is held as to whether anything has been done, or some
act which he ordered has not been performed, in opposition to the Edict
of the Prætor. In a proceeding of this kind sometimes a penalty is
involved, and sometimes it is not; it is penal, for instance, where a
formal promise is concerned, and it is not where an arbiter is demanded.
It is the practice to proceed under prohibitory interdicts always by way
of solemn promise, and, in the case of orders for restitution or
production, this is either done by way of formal promise or by means of
the formula styled "arbitrary".

​(142) Hence, the original division of interdicts is into prohibitory,
or for restriction, or for production.

​(143) The next division is into those instituted for the purpose of
obtaining, retaining, or recovering possession.

​(144) An interdict issued to the prætorian possessor of an estate for
the purpose of obtaining possession begins: "Whatever portion of the
property"; and its force and effect is that the possession of property
held by anyone, as heir, or possessor, or who has fraudulently
relinquished possession, shall be restored to the party to whom
possession is granted by the interdict. He is considered to possess the
prop-

the great lawyers of that age are still quoted authoritatively in our
courts. The ancient writs of English legal procedure were directly
derived from the Formula. As equity jurisprudence traces its origin to
the broad and indulgent interpretation permitted the Prætorian Tribunal,
so the modern bill in equity bears many striking resemblances to the
instruments by means of which parties litigant were enabled to maintain
their rights and protect their persons before the most powerful and
distinguished of the Roman magistrates.

The *formulæ* were almost infinite in number and variety, and the party
to a suit who failed to elect the one applicable to his case paid the
penalty of his ignorance or negligence with the loss of his right of
action. The abuses which grew out of the inflexible adherence to certain
rules and forms which, encouraging chicanery and oppression, were often
productive of gross injustice, eventually caused the abolition of the
system. — ed.

erty as heir, not only when he is the actual heir, but also when he
thinks that he is the heir. He holds the property as the mere possessor
who has anything belonging to an estate, or the entire estate, without
any title to the same, knowing that he is in possession of something
that does not belong to him.

The interdict for the purpose of obtaining possession is so called
because it is only advantageous to him who now, for the first time,
attempts to acquire possession of the property; therefore, if anyone
having obtained possession should lose it, the interdict ceases to be of
any benefit to him.

​(145) Again, an interdict is granted to the purchaser of a bankrupt
estate, which some authorities call a possessory interdict.

​(146) In like manner, an interdict of the same kind is granted to one
who purchases confiscated property at a public sale, which is called
*Sectorium* for the reason that those who purchase such property at
public sale, are designated *Sectores*.

​(147) The interdict called *Salvianum* was also one devised for the
purpose of obtaining possession; and the owner of land can make use of
it against the property of the tenant which the latter has pledged to
him as security for the future payment of rent.

​(148) It is the practice for interdicts for the purpose of retaining
possession to be granted when a controversy arises between two parties
with reference to the ownership of property; and it must be previously
ascertained which one of the litigants should have possession, and which
one should have a right to demand it; and it is for this purpose that
the interdicts *Uti Possidetis* and *Utribi* has been established.

​(149) The interdict *Uti Possidetis* is granted with reference to the
possession of land or buildings; the interdict *Utrubi* with reference
to the possession of movable property.

​(150) If the interdict has reference to land or houses, the Prætor
orders that party to have the preference who, at the time when the
interdict was issued, obtained possession from his adversary, neither by
force nor clandestinely, nor with his acquiescence.

When, however, it has reference to movable property, he orders that
party to have the preference who, for the greater part of that year, has
held possession against his adversary neither by force, nor
clandestinely, or with his acquiescence; and this is sufficiently
apparent from the terms of the interdicts themselves.

​(151) But, in the interdict *Utrubi*, not only is the possession of
every one a benefit to him, but that of another party which may be
properly treated as accessory to it; for instance, that of a deceased
person whose heir he is, and that of anyone from whom he has purchased
property, or acquired it by means of a donation or a dowry. Hence, if
the lawful possession of another party is added to our own, and it
exceeds the possession of our adversary, we will be successful in the
proceeding under that interdict.

The accession of time is not granted, and cannot be granted to one who
has no possession of his own, for whatever does not exist can

have nothing added to it. If, however, a party should have defective
possession, that is to say, if it had been acquired from his adversary
either by violence, or clandestinely, or by mere acquiescence, no
accession is granted, for his own possession is of no advantage to him.

​(152) Moreover, the year is reckoned backward, and hence, for example,
if you had possession eight months before I did, and I had it during the
seven following months, I will be entitled to the preference, because
your possession for the first three months would be of no advantage to
you under this interdict, as the possession was in another year,

​(153) We consider a party to be in possession not only where we
ourselves possess, but also where anyone is in possession in our name,
although he may not be subject to our authority; as, for instance, a
tenant or a lessee. We are also considered to have possession by means
of those with whom we have deposited property, or lent it for use, or to
whom we have granted gratuitous lodging, or the usufruct or use; and
this is what is commonly called the power of retaining possession of
property by anyone who possesses it in our name.

Again, many authorities hold that possession can be retained merely by
intention; that is to say, that though we ourselves may not be in
possession, nor anyone else in our name, still, if there be no intention
of relinquishing possession, and we leave the property, intending
afterwards to return, we are deemed to have retained possession of it.
We stated in the Second Commentary by what persons we could obtain
possession, nor is there any doubt that we cannot obtain it by mere
intention.

​(154) The interdict for the purpose of recovering possession is usually
granted where anyone has been ejected by violence, for the interdict
which is issued begins as follows: "In the place from which you have
been forcibly ejected"; and by means of it the party who ejected the
other is compelled to restore possession of the property to him,
provided the latter did not himself obtain possession either by
violence, or clandestinely, or by permission from the former; hence, I
can eject with impunity anyone who has obtained possession from me
either by violence, or clandestinely, or by permission.

​(155) Sometimes, however, even though I should forcibly eject the party
who obtained possession from me either by violence, or clandestinely, or
by permission, I can be compelled to restore possession to him; for
instance, if I should eject him by force of arms, for, on account of the
atrocity of the crime, I am liable to have proceedings instituted
against me by which I shall be absolutely obliged to reinstate him in
possession. We understand by the expression, "force of arms," not only
the use of shields, swords, and helmets, but also that of sticks and
stone.

​(156) The third division of interdicts is into simple and double.

​(157) Simple interdicts are, for instance, those in which one party is
plaintiff and the other defendant, and of this description are all those
established for the restitution or the production of property; for he is
the plaintiff who demands that the property be either produced or
restored, and he is the defendant from whom it is demanded that he
produce or restore it.

​(158) Of prohibitory interdicts some are double, and others simple.

​(159) Simple interdicts are, for instance, those by which the Prætor
forbids a defendant to perform any illegal act on consecrated ground, or
in a public stream, or on its bank; for the plaintiff is he who demands
that the act shall not be committed, and the defendant is he who
attempts to commit it.

​(160) Double interdicts are such, for instance, as *Uti Possidetis*and
*Utrubi*. They are called double because the position of both litigants
in them is the same, and neither is exclusively understood to be
defendant or plaintiff, but both of them sustain the parts of defendant
and plaintiff. In fact the Prætor addresses both in the same language,
for the form of these interdicts is as follows: "I forbid force to be
employed to prevent you from having possession of the property which you
now possess." The terms of the other are as follows: "I forbid violence
to be employed to prevent the party from removing the slave in dispute,
and who has been in his possession for the greater part of the year."

​(161) The different kinds of interdicts having been" explained, let us
next consider their order and effects, and we shall begin with those
which are simple.

​(162) Therefore, if an interdict for the restitution or the production
of property is issued; for instance, for the restitution of possession
to one who has been forcibly ejected, or for the production of a
freedman whose services his patron desires to claim, the proceedings are
sometimes brought to a conclusion without the risk of incurring the
penalty, and sometimes with that risk.

​(163) For, if he against whom the case is brought should demand an
arbiter, he receives the formula which is called "arbitrary," and if, by
the award of the judge, he is required to restore or produce any
property, he either produces or restores it without any penalty, and
thus is discharged from liability; or if he does not restore or produce
it, he is compelled to indemnify the plaintiff for the loss sustained
through his disobedience. The plaintiff, however, can, without incurring
a penalty, bring an action against one who is not required to produce or
restore any property, unless an action for vexatious litigation is
brought against him to recover the tenth part of the property in
question; although it is said to have been held by Proculus that an
action for vexatious litigation should be refused to him who demands
arbitration, because he is considered to have, as it were, admitted that
he ought to restore or produce the property. We, however, make use of
another rule, and very properly; for anyone who demands an arbiter
rather shows his intention to litigate in a more moderate manner, than
for the reason that he admits the validity of the claim of his
adversary.

​(164) It should be observed that he who desires to demand an arbiter
must do so before leaving court, that is before he departs from

the tribunal of the Prætor, for if such a demand is made later it will
not be granted.

​(165) Hence, if he does not demand an arbiter, but leaves the tribunal
without doing so, the affair is brought to a conclusion at the risk of
the parties; for the plaintiff challenges his adversary to deposit the
forfeit which shall be paid if, in disobedience to the Edict of the
Prætor, he does not produce or restore the property; and the defendant
restipulates in opposition to the demand for a forfeit by his opponent.
The plaintiff then delivers to his adversary the formula of the forfeit
to be deposited, and the latter in his turn delivers that of the
restipulation.

The plaintiff, however, adds to the formula of the promise of a forfeit
another action for the restipulation or the production of the property
in question, so that if he should be successful, and the property is not
either reduced or restored to him . . . . ^[1]^

​(166) When a double interdict has been granted, the mesne profits are
sold at auction and the highest bidder is placed in possession of the
property, provided he furnishes his adversary security under the
stipulation for the enjoyment of the profits; the force and effect of
which is that if judgment should be rendered against him with reference
to possession, he shall pay his adversary the sum provided for in the
stipulation.

This bidding between the parties is designated the bidding for the
profits, because they contend with one another for the profits of the
property during the preliminary proceedings. After this, each one of
them challenges the other to deposit the forfeit to be -paid by the
promisor, if he has by violence interfered with the possession of his
adversary, and hence has violated the Edict of the Prætor; and each of
them mutually bind themselves, or the two stipulations being united so
that one promise is made between them, and also one restipulation is
entered into by one party against the other, which is the more
convenient way of proceeding, and therefore the one most generally in
use.

(166a) Then, after the necessary formulas of all the promises and
restipulations have been filed by both parties, the judge before whom
the case is tried must examine the point introduced by the Prætor in the
interdict; that is to say, which of the parties was in possession of the
land or the house at the time when the interdict was issued, and that he
did not obtain possession of it by violence, or clandestinely, or with
the permission of the adverse party. When the judge has investigated
this, and has, perhaps, decided in my favor, he condemns my adversary to
pay the penal sums called for by the promise and the restipulation which
I made with him, and in consequence discharges me from liability for the
promise and restipulation which were made with me. Further, if my
adversary had possession of the property for the reason that he made the
highest bid for the profits of the same, and he does not restore
possession to me, he can have judgment rendered against him in the
action styled Cascellian or Secutorian.

Original manuscript illegible.

​(167) Therefore, if he who is the highest bidder does not prove that he
is entitled to possession, he is ordered to pay the sums mentioned in
the promise and restipulation, as well as the amount he offered in his
bid for the mesne profits at auction, by way of penalty, and to restore
possession of the property; and, in addition to this, he must return the
profits which, in the meantime he has collected; for the sum of money
mentioned in the bid for the profits is not the price of the same, but
is paid as a penalty because the party attempted to retain possession
belonging to another, for this time, and also to enjoy the profits
derived from the property.

​(168) Moreover, if he who made a lower bid for the profits at the
auction does not prove that he is entitled to possession, he should only
be required to pay the amount of the promise and restipulation by way of
penalty.

​(169) We should observe, however, that the unsuccessful bidder, without
availing himself of the stipulation for the enjoyment of the profits,
has a right to bring an action on the sale at auction, just as by the
Cascellian or Secutorian action he can sue for the recovery of
possession. A special action has been introduced for this purpose, which
is called "fructuary," by means of which the plaintiff receives
satisfaction for his judgment. This action is also called Secutorian,
because it follows the advantage of the promise, but it is not also
called Cascellian.

​(170) But, for the reason that, after an interdict has been issued,
some of the parties are unwilling to institute other proceedings under
it, and on this account matters cannot be expedited, the Prætor made
provision for a case of this kind, and introduced interdicts which we
call "secondary"; because they are issued in the second place, under
such circumstances. The force and effect of these is that he who does
not institute further proceedings under the interdict, for example, one
who does not forcibly eject the other party; or does not make a bid for
the mesne profits of the property; or does not furnish security for the
same; or does not participate in the promise, or defend the case; shall,
if he is in possession of the property, restore it to his adversary; for
if he is not in possession, he shall not use violence against the other
party who is. Hence, although, otherwise, he might have been able to
succeed under the interdict *Uti Possidetis*, if he could have complied
with the other requirements imposed by it, and did not do so, he will
still lose his case by means of a secondary interdict . . . . ^[1]^

​(171) For the purpose of avoiding vexatious litigation, the parties are
sometimes deterred by pecuniary penalties, and sometimes by an oath
which is imposed by the Prætor. In certain cases an action for double
damages is brought against a defendant; for instance, in the collection
of a judgment debt, or for money expended for a principal, or for
unlawful damage to property, or where proceedings are instituted to
collect legacies left by condemnation. In some instances, the deposit of
a forfeit is permitted to be made, for example, in an action

Original manuscript indistinct.

for a certain sum of money which has been lent, or to collect a debt
formerly incurred. Where suit is brought to collect a loan, the amount
is one-third of the sum in question; and in the case of the
acknowledgment of a balance due, it is one-half.

​(172) If no deposit was made as a forfeit, and the penalty of double
damages was not imposed upon the party against whom the action was
brought, and under it, from the beginning, no more than simple damages
can be collected; the Prætor permits the plaintiff to require the
defendant to swear that he has not made a denial for the purpose of
annoyance. Hence, although the heirs and those who are considered to
occupy the position of heirs, are not subject to a penalty, and women
and wards are exempted from the penalty of a forfeit, the Prætor,
nevertheless, orders them to be sworn.

​(173) Moreover, in some cases from the beginning an action for more
than simple damages will lie; as in an action of manifest theft a
fourfold penalty, in non-manifest theft a double penalty, and when
stolen property has been delivered to another a threefold penalty can be
collected; for in these and some other instances, the suit is for more
than simple damages, whether the party denies, or admits the claim.

​(174) Vexatious litigation by the plaintiff is also restrained
sometimes by the action for this purpose, sometimes by the contrary
action, sometimes by oath, and sometimes by a counter stipulation.

​(175) The action of vexatious litigation is applicable as against all
other actions, and is for the tenth part of the claim, but for the third
part when brought against a joint stipulator.

​(176) The party sued, however, has the right to choose whether he will
bring the action of vexatious litigation, or exact an oath from his
adversary that he has not brought suit for the purpose of causing
annoyance.

​(177) The counter action, however, is only applicable in certain cases;
for instance, where suit is brought for injury, and where one is brought
against a woman on the ground that having been placed in possession on
account of her unborn child, she transferred it fraudulently to some
other party; or where anyone brings an action alleging that he has been
placed in possession by the Prætor and is refused admission by another.
In the case of an action of injury it is granted for the tenth part of
the amount in dispute; in the two others for the fifth.

​(178) But, the most severe restraint is that produced by the counter
action. For no one is condemned in the action of vexatious litigation to
pay the tenth part of the amount in dispute, unless he knew that he had
no right to bring suit, and did so only for the purpose of annoying his
adversary and relies for success rather upon the error or injustice of
the judge, than on account of the merits of his cause; for vexatious
litigation, like the crime of theft, depends upon intention. In the
contrary action, however, the plaintiff will, under all circumstances,
be condemned if he should not prevail in the former action, although he
had good reason to believe that he had a right to bring suit.

​(179) Still, in all those cases in which the contrary action can be
brought, the action for vexatious litigation will also lie; but it is
only

permitted to have recourse to one or the other of these proceedings. For
which reason if an oath should be exacted that the action has not been
brought for the purpose of annoyance, just as the action for vexatious
litigation will not lie, so the contrary action should not be granted.

​(180) The penalty of the counter engagement is usually required in
certain cases, and, as in the contrary action the plaintiff is condemned
under all circumstances if he should not gain his case, nor is it
necessary for him to know that he had no good cause of action; so the
penalty of the counter engagement must, under all circumstances, be paid
by the plaintiff if he was unable to gain his case.

​(181) Moreover, when anyone undergoes the penalty of the counter
engagement neither the action for vexatious litigation can be brought
against him, nor can the oath be administered, for it is clear that in
cases of this kind the contrary action will not lie.

​(182) In certain actions persons who are condemned become infamous, as
in those of theft, robbery with violence, and injury, also in cases of
partnership, trust, guardianship, mandate, and deposit. In actions of
theft, robbery with violence, and injury, not only are the persons
convicted branded with infamy, but also where a compromise is made, as
is stated in the Edict of the *Prætor*; and this is proper, for it makes
a great deal of difference whether anyone becomes a debtor on account of
the commission of a crime, or under a contract. But while it is not
expressly stated in any part of the Edict that a party is to become
infamous, still he is said to be infamous who is forbidden to represent
another in court, or to appoint, give, or have an agent or attorney, or
to intervene as agent or attorney in a case.

​(183) In conclusion, it should be noted that a person who desires to
bring an action against another must summon him to appear in court, and
if the party summoned does not appear, he will be liable to a penalty
under the Edict of the Prætor. It is, however, not permitted to summon
certain persons without the permission of the Prætor; for instance,
parents, patrons, patronesses, and the children or parents of a patron
or patroness; and anyone who violates this provision is liable to a
penalty.

​(184) However, when the adversary who has been summoned appears in
court, and the business cannot be finished on the same day, the
defendant must furnish security; that is to say he must promise to
appear on some other designated day.

​(185) Security in certain instances is simple, that is, given without
sureties; and in others it is given with sureties; in still other
instances, it is given by oath; and in some cases a reference is made to
judges, that is to say, if the party does not appear, he may be
immediately condemned to pay the amount of the security by the judges;
and all these things are explained at length in the Edict of the
*Prætor*.

​(186) If proceedings have been instituted for the collection of a
judgment, or for money expended for a principal, the amount of the
security is equal to the value of the property in dispute. But in other
cases the amount is that which the plaintiff swears that he has not
brought suit for with the intention of causing annoyance; provided that
the security is not more than half the sum in question, or more than a
hundred thousand sesterces. Hence, if the property in dispute is valued
at a hundred thousand sesterces, and the action is not for the
collection of a judgment, or money expended for a principal, the amount
of the security cannot be more than fifty thousand sesterces.

​(187) Those persons whom we cannot summon to appear in court without
the permission of the Prætor, we cannot compel to furnish security for
their future appearance; unless the Prætor, after having been applied
to, grants permission.

END OF THE INSTITUTES OF GAIUS.

* * * * *
