SECOND COMMENTARY.

​(1) In the former Commentary we explained the law of persons; now let
us consider the law of things, which either form part of our property or
do not form part of it.

​(2) The principal division of things is under two heads, namely, those
that are subject to divine right, and those that are subject to human
right.

​(3) Things which are subject to divine right are such as are sacred and
religious.

​(4) Sacred things are those which are consecrated to the gods above;
religious things are those which are dedicated to the spirits of the
departed.

​(5) That only is considered sacred which has been consecrated by the
authority of the Roman people; that is to say, by a law or a Decree of
the Senate enacted for that purpose.

​(6) We, however, render things religious by our own will, when we bury
a body in our own ground, provided we have a right to conduct the
funeral of the deceased.

​(7) Moreover, it has been held by the greater number of authorities
that, in the provinces, ground does not become religious, as the
ownership of the same belongs to the Roman people or to the Emperor, and
we are only considered to have the possession or the usufruct of the
same, and though it may not actually be religious, it is regarded as
such.

Likewise, in the provinces, while property which has not been
consecrated by the authority of the Roman people is, properly speaking,
not sacred, it is still considered as such.

​(8) Holy places are those which are, to a certain extent, subject to
divine right, as for instance, the walls and gates of a city.

​(9) Again, things which are subject to divine right are not included
among the possessions of any individual; that is to say, things which
are subject to human right are, for the most part, included in the
property of someone, they may, however, belong to no one; for an estate
before any heir appears is without an owner, as a rule.

​(10) Things subject to human right are either public or private.

​(11) Things which are public are considered to be the property of no
individual, for they are held to belong to the people at large; things
which are private are the property of individuals.

​(12) Moreover, some things are corporeal and others are incorporeal.

​(13) Corporeal things are those that can be touched, as, for instance,
land, a slave, clothing, gold, silver, and innumerable other objects.

​(14) Incorporeal things are such as are not tangible, and are those
consisting merely of rights, as, for instance, inheritances, usufructs,
and obligations, no matter in what way the latter may have been
contracted. For while corporeal things are included in an estate, and
the crops gathered from land are corporeal, and what is due to us

under the terms of some obligation is, for the most part, of a corporeal
character, for example, land, slaves, money; still, the right of
succession, the right of use and enjoyment, and the right of obligation,
are incorporeal. To the same class belong rights attaching to urban and
rustic estates, which are also called servitudes. Among these are the
right to raise a building higher and obstruct the lights of a neighbor;
the right to prevent a building from being raised, so that the lights of
a neighbor may not be obstructed; the right to the use of streams, and
to have rainwater fall upon the premises of another. . . .^[1]^

(14a) Things are either susceptible, or not susceptible of mancipation
by sale.^[2]^ Those susceptible of sale by mancipation are lands and
houses in Italy, slaves, domestic animals and rustic servitudes; but
servitudes attached to urban estates are not thus subject to sale.

​(15) Likewise, estates subject to taxation and tribute are not subject
to sale. According to what we have stated, cattle, horses, mules, and
asses are held by some authorities to be susceptible of sale as soon as
they are born; but Nerva, Proculus, and other jurists of a different
school think that such animals are not subject to sale unless they have
been tamed; and if this cannot be done on account of their extreme
wildness, then they are considered to be salable when they reach the age
at which others of the same kind are usually tamed.

​(16) In like manner, wild beasts, as for instance, bears, lions, and
those animals which can almost be classed as wild beasts, for example,
elephants and camels, are not subject to sale; and therefore it makes no
difference whether these animals have been broken to harness or to carry
burdens, for they were not even known at the time when some things were
decided to be saleable and others were not.

​(17) Again, almost all things which are incorporeal are not subject to
sale, with the exception of servitudes attached to rustic estates; for
it is established that these can be sold, although they are included in
the number of incorporeal things.

​(18) A great difference exists between things which are saleable by
mancipation and things which are not.

​(19) Things which are not saleable by mancipation become the property
of others absolutely by mere delivery; if they are corporeal and on this
account are capable of being delivered.

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

^[2]^ The early Roman law divided property of every description into two
classes, *res mancipi* and *res nec mancipi*. Ownership of the first
could only be transferred by compliance with certain prescribed legal
formalities, either involving a fictitious sale in the presence of
witnesses and a balance-holder, or a public surrender of the property in
court. The legal capacity to acquire *res mancipi* was vested only in
those enjoying the privileges of Roman citizenship, who were said to
obtain their title *ex jure quiritium*, by quiritarian right. Where
neither of these formal methods of transfer was employed, the ownership
did not pass until sufficient time had elapsed to establish title by
prescription, and in the meantime, the property was considered to be *in
bonis*, or merely in possession of the holder by bonitarian right. *Res
nec mancipi*, which included everything not coming under the first head,
and not belonging to the State, as set forth in the text, were
transferable by mere delivery. The distinction between *res mancipi*and
*res nec mancipi* which, for many years previously, had practically been
ignored in business transactions, was abolished by Justinian. — ed.

​(20) Therefore, if I deliver to you a garment, or some gold or silver,
either by way of sale or donation, or for any other reason, the property
immediately becomes yours, provided I am the owner of the same.

​(21) To the same class belong lands in the provinces, some of which we
designate as taxable, and others as tributary. Those are taxable which
are situated in the provinces and are understood to be the property of
the Roman people; those are tributary which are situated in the
provinces and are considered the property of the Emperor.

​(22) On the other hand, things susceptible of sale are such as are
transferred to another by mancipation, from whence they are styled
mancipable, and this has the same validity as a transfer in court.

​(23) We explained mancipation and the manner in which it takes place in
the preceding Commentary.

​(24) A transfer of property in court takes place as follows: He to whom
the property is to be conveyed appears before a magistrate of the Roman
people, for example, the Prætor, and holding the property in his hands,
says: "I declare that this slave belongs to me by quiritarian right."
Then, after he makes this claim, the Prætor interrogates the other party
to the transfer as to whether he makes a counter-claim, and if he does
not do so, or remains silent, he adjudges the property to the party who
claimed it. This is called an act of legal procedure, and it can even
take place in a province before the governor of the same.

​(25) For the most part, however, indeed almost always, we make use of
sales by mancipation; for while we ourselves can transact our business
in the presence of our friends, there is no reason or necessity for us
to do so with greater difficulty before the Prætor, or the Governor of
the province.

​(26) If the property susceptible of alienation is neither sold nor
transferred in court . . . .^[1]^

(26a) In the provinces, however, no private property in land exists, nor
is there any free citizenship.

​(27) Moreover, in this place we should note that where the property is
merely attached to the soil of Italy, it is not attached to the soil of
a province; for the term "attached" only applies where the property is
mancipable, and land in a province is not saleable by mancipation. . .
.^[1]^

​(28) It is clear that incorporeal property is not susceptible of
delivery.

​(29) The rights of urban estates can only be transferred in court;
those attached to rustic estates can also be sold.

​(30) Usufruct is only susceptible of transfer in court, for the the
owner of property can transfer the usufruct of the same to another so
that the latter may have the usufruct, and he himself retain the bare
ownership.

The usufructuary, by transferring his right to the owner of the property
in court, causes himself to be divested of it, and the usufruct

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

to be merged in the ownership. Where, however, the right is transferred
by him to another in court, it is, nevertheless, retained by the
usufructuary, for such a transfer is held to be void.

​(31) These proceedings only relate to lands in Italy, for only such
lands can be transferred by mancipation, or surrendered in court. On the
other hand, with reference to lands situated in the provinces, if anyone
desires to create either the usufruct of the same, or the rights of way
on foot, on horseback, and for vehicles; or of conducting water, or of
raising houses to a greater height, or of preventing this from being
done to avoid obstructing the lights of a neighbor, and other servitudes
of this description, he can do so by means of agreements and
stipulations, for the reason that the lands themselves are not
susceptible of either mancipation or surrender in court.

​(32) However, as an usufruct can be created in slaves and other
animals, we must understand that the usufruct in them can also be
created, even in the provinces, by a surrender of this right in court.

​(33) But when we said that a usufruct could only be created by a
surrender in court, this was not a rash statement, although it may be
established by mancipation in such a way that in disposing of the
property the usufruct of the same be reserved; for the usufruct itself
is not sold but is reserved in the disposal of the property; and the
result is that the usufruct is vested in one person and the ownership of
the property in another.

​(34) Estates also are only susceptible of alienation by a surrender in
court.

​(35) For if the party to whom an estate belongs as heir-at-law
surrenders the same in court before it is entered upon, that is before
any heir appears; the person to whom the surrender is made becomes the
heir, just as if he himself had been called by law to the inheritance;
but if he should surrender it after having incurred the obligation
imposed by acceptance, he will, nevertheless, remain the heir, and for
this reason will be responsible to the creditors. The debts will also be
extinguished, and in this way the debtors of the estate will be
benefited; and the corporeal property of the said estate will pass to
him to whom the estate was surrendered, just as if separate portions of
the same had been surrendered to him.

​(36) A testamentary heir, by the surrender of an estate in court to
another before it has been accepted, performs an act which is void; but
if he should surrender it after he has entered upon it, what we recently
stated with reference to one to whom the estate legally belongs by law
as the heir of a person dying intestate will apply, if he surrenders the
estate in court after assuming the obligations entailed by the
acceptance of the same.

​(37) The same opinion is held by the authorities of a different school
with reference to necessary heirs, namely, that it appears to make no
difference whether a party becomes an heir by entering on an estate, or
whether he becomes heir-at-law without his own consent; which will be
explained in its proper place. Our preceptors, however, hold that the
act of a necessary heir is void when he surrenders the estate in court.

​(38) Obligations, no matter how they may have been contracted, cannot
be transferred in either of these ways; for if anything is due from
someone to me, and I wish to transfer the claim to you, I cannot do this
in any of the ways by which corporeal property is transferred to a third
party; but it will be necessary for you to stipulate with the debtor
under my direction, with the result that he will be released by me and
becomes liable to you, which is called the novation of an obligation.

​(39) Without this novation, you cannot sue in your own name, but you
must bring your action in my name, as my agent or attorney.^[1]^

​(40) In the next place, we should note that only one ownership exists
for aliens, for any one of them is considered either to be the owner, or
not the owner, of property. The Roman people, in former times, made use
of this rule, for every one was either the owner under quiritarian
right, or he was understood to have no ownership whatever; but
subsequently, they established a division of ownership, so that one
person could own property by quiritarian right and another could hold it
by bonitarian right.

​(41) But if I neither sell an article to you nor surrender it in court,
but only deliver it to you, the said article becomes yours by bonitarian
right, but still remains mine by quiritarian right, until you, through
possession, acquire it by usucaption; for as soon as usucaption is
completed, the article becomes absolutely yours, that is, the bonitarian
and quiritarian rights vest in you, just as if it had been sold or
surrendered in court.

​(42) Usucaption of movable property, however, is completed within a
year, that of lands and houses within two years; and this was provided
by the Law of the Twelve Tables.

^[1]^ Among the Romans, the origin of legal representation in court is
directly traceable to the close relations existing between patron and
client. The former, invariably of patrician rank, was, at all times,
obliged to protect the interests of his illiterate and inexperienced
dependents; and especially was this the ease when they became involved
in litigation. This duty was not only a point of honor with the patron,
but its observance was enforced by the infliction of severe penalties,
and its violation incurred public reproach and infamy. A patron was
never permitted to accept any compensation for his services, no matter
how important or valuable they were. His influence, however, in time
declined, and as the study of the law developed, and men chose it as a
profession, all classes of the people sought the advice and assistance
of jurisconsults of acknowledged learning and ability, whose attainments
had kept pace with the progress and technical requirements of legal
procedure. Still, no fees were actually charged, but custom demanded
that one styled an *honorarium*, should always be offered, the amount of
this was subsequently fixed by law, and the provision of the *Lex
Cincia*, prohibiting any remuneration for legal services — "*Ne quis ob
causam orandam mercede aut donis emeretur" — was* abrogated. After the
patron came the *procurator*, who was only an agent, or the
attorney-in-fact of his constituent, and generally possessed of little
or no legal knowledge. The *cognitor*, who was the original
attorney-at-law, and the advocate, were those who usually tried and
argued cases before the Roman tribunals. The *procurator* absolutely
took the place of his principal, and became personally responsible if an
adverse decision was rendered; but the *cognitor*merely appeared for his
client, just as a modern lawyer does. — ed.

​(43) Again, we are entitled to usucaption of property of this kind
where it has been delivered to us by a party who is not its owner; and
this rule applies whether the property is subject to sale or not,
provided we received it in good faith, and believed that he who
delivered it was the owner.

​(44) This regulation seems to have been adopted to prevent the
ownership of property from being uncertain for a long period of time, as
the term of one or two years should be sufficient to enable the owner to
inquire after his property, which time is granted to the possessor to
acquire it by usucaption.

​(45) Sometimes, however, a party who possesses property in the utmost
good faith still cannot acquire the same by usucaption; for instance,
where he has possession of an article which has been stolen or obtained
by violence, for the Law of the Twelve Tables forbids stolen property to
be acquired by usucaption, and the *Lex Julia et Plautia* makes the same
provision with reference to property obtained by force.

​(46) Likewise, lands situated in the provinces are not susceptible of
usucaption.

​(47) Again, in former times, property susceptible of mancipation which
belonged to a woman under the guardianship of agnates could not be
acquired by usucaption, unless it had been delivered by herself with the
authority of her guardian; and this rule was established by the Law of
the Twelve Tables.

​(48) It is also clear that men who are free, as well as sacred and
religious property, cannot be acquired by usucaption.

​(49) The common saying that the usucaption of property which has been
stolen or obtained by force is prohibited by law, does not mean that the
thief himself, or the party who obtains possession by violence, cannot
acquire it by usucaption (for he is not entitled to usucaption for
another reason, namely, because he is a possessor in bad faith), but
that no one else, even though he purchased the property in good faith,
has the right to acquire it by usucaption.

​(50) Wherefore, with reference to movable property, a possessor in good
faith does not readily acquire it by usucaption, because a person who
sells the property of another and delivers it, commits a theft; and the
same thing happens if the property is delivered for any other reason.
Sometimes, however, this is not the case, for if an heir believes that
property which has been loaned, hired, or deposited with the deceased,
belonged to the estate, and he should sell or give it away, he is not
guilty of theft; and also if one to whom the usufruct of a female slave
belongs, believing that her child was his, should sell or give it away,
he does not commit a theft, for theft cannot be committed without the
intention of stealing. This may also happen in other ways, as where
anyone transfers property belonging to another to a third party, without
the defect of theft, and enables it to be acquired by usucaption by the
possessor of the same.

​(51) Anyone can obtain possession of land belonging to another without
the exertion of violence, if it either becomes vacant through the
neglect of the owner, or because he died without leaving any heir, or
was absent for a long time; and if he should transfer the said land to
another who received it in good faith, the possessor can acquire it by
usucaption. And although the party who obtained the land when vacant may
be aware that it belongs to another, still, this does not in any way
prejudice the right of usucaption of the possessor in good faith, as the
opinion of those who held that land could be the subject of theft is no
longer accepted.

​(52) Again, on the other hand, it happens that anyone who knows that
the property which he possesses belongs to another can acquire it by
usucaption; as, for instance where someone has possession of property
belonging to an estate of which the heir who is not yet born has not
obtained possession; for he is permitted to acquire it in this manner,
provided the said property is of a nature which admits of usucaption,
and this kind of possession and usucaption is styled that of a person
representing an heir.

​(53) Usucaption of this kind is so readily granted that real property
may be acquired by usucaption within the space of a single year.

​(54) The reason why, in this instance, land can be acquired by
usucaption in a single year, is because that, in former times, through
the possession of property belonging to an estate the estate itself was
considered to be acquired by usucaption, that is to say, in a year; for,
though the Law of the Twelve Tables establishes the term of two years
for the usucaption of land and one year for that of other property, an
estate "was considered to be included in the latter, as it is neither
part of the soil nor corporeal; and although it was afterwards held that
estates themselves were not capable of usucaption, still the right to
usucaption with reference to all property belonging to an estate, even
land, remained in force.

​(55) The reason why such thoroughly dishonorable possession and
usucaption was allowed was because the ancient authorities desired that
estates should be entered upon more quickly, and that there should be
persons to perform the sacred ceremonies to which, in those times, the
greatest importance was attached; and also that the creditors might have
someone from whom they might collect their claims.

​(56) This species of possession and usucaption is called lucrative, for
the party knows that he is profiting by the property of another.

​(57) At the present time, however, it is not lucrative, for a Decree of
the Senate, enacted at the instance of the Divine Hadrian, provided that
usucaptions of this kind could be revoked; and therefore an heir can
recover the property by bringing an action for the estate against him
who acquired it by usucaption, just as if the usucaption had never taken
place.

​(58) Where there is a necessary heir, usucaption of this kind cannot
take place under the law.

​(59) A person can knowingly acquire the property of another by
usucaption under other circumstances; for if anyone makes a fiduciary
sale of the property of another or surrenders it in court to a third
party, and the owner himself should obtain possession of the same, he
can acquire it by usucaption, even in the case of land, after the
expiration of a year. This species of usucaption is called a recovery by
use, because property which we owned at a former time we recover in this
way by usucaption.

​(60) Fiduciary ownership, however, is contracted either where the
creditor holds the property by way of pledge, or through a friend with
whom our property is placed for safe-keeping; and, when the trust is
contracted with a friend, recovery by use can, under all circumstances,
take place; but where this is done with a creditor, the money must, by
all means be paid, and when it has not yet been paid, the property can
only be recovered in this way provided the debtor has not hired it from
the creditor, or have obtained possession of it during pleasure; as in
this instance lucrative usucaption will take place.

​(61) Moreover, if the people should sell property pledged to satisfy a
claim, and the owner should become possessed of it, recovery by use is
permitted; but in this case land will be recovered after the lapse of
two years. This is what is commonly called recovery of possession after
public sale, for he who buys it from the people is called a purchaser of
mortgaged land.

​(62) It sometimes happens that an owner has not the power to alienate
his property, and that one who is not the owner can do so.^[1]^

​(63) For, by the *Lex Julia*, a husband was forbidden to alienate dotal
land against the consent of his wife, although the land may have become
his own either by sale to him as dowry, or by surrender in court, or by
usucaption. It is doubtful whether this rule is applicable only to lands
in Italy, or also to those in the provinces.

​(64) On the other hand, an agnate who is the curator of an insane
person can, by the Law of the Twelve Tables, alienate the property of
the latter; and an agent can also, as well as a creditor, alienate that
of his principal, if authorized to do so under an agreement, although
the property does not belong to him. This may perhaps be considered to
be done for the reason that the pledge is understood to be alienated
with the consent of the debtor, who previously agreed that the creditor
might be permitted to sell the pledge, if the money was not paid.

​(65) Therefore, from what we have stated, it appears that certain
property can be alienated by Natural Law; as, for instance, that which
is transferred by mere delivery, and that other property can be
alienated by the Civil Law, as through sale, surrender in court, and
usucaption, for these rights are peculiar to Roman citizens.

​(66) Property which becomes ours by delivery can be acquired by us not
only by natural law but also by occupancy, and hence we become the
owners of the same because it previously belonged to no one else; and in
this class are included all animals which are taken on land, or in the
water, or in the air.

^[1]^ In the text, Sections 62, 63 and 64, follow immediately after
Section 79. As there does not appear to be any reason for this and it
evidently is an error, I have placed them in their regular order. — ed.

​(67) Therefore, if we should take captive any wild animal, bird, or
fish, it is understood to be ours only as long as it is in our custody;
for when it escapes from our control and recovers its natural liberty,
it again becomes the property of the first occupant, because it ceases
to be ours. It is considered to recover its natural liberty when it
escapes from our vision, or, although it may be in our sight, its
pursuit is difficult.

​(68) In the case of those animals, however, which are accustomed to go
away and return, as for instance pigeons, and bees, and also deer which
are accustomed to go into the forests and return, we have adopted the
rule which has come down to us from former times, namely, that if these
animals should not have the intention to return, they also cease to be
ours and become the property of the first occupant; and they are
considered to have ceased to have the intention to return when they
abandon their habit of returning.

​(69) Property taken from the enemy also becomes ours by Natural Law.

​(70) Land acquired by us through alluvion also becomes ours under the
same law. This is held to take place when a river, by degrees, makes
additions of soil to our land in such a way that we cannot estimate the
amount added at any one moment of time; and this is what is commonly
stated to be an addition made by alluvion, which is added so gradually
as to escape our sight.^[1]^

​(71) Therefore, if the river should carry away a part of your land and
bring it to mine, that part will still continue to be yours.

​(72) But, if an island rises in the middle of a river, it is the common
property of those who possess land on both sides of the stream; but if
it is not in the middle of the river, it will belong to those who have
land on the nearest bank of the stream.

​(73) Moreover, any building erected on our land by another, even though
the latter may have erected it in his own name, is ours by Natural Law,
for the reason that the surface is part of the soil.

​(74) This rule applies with still greater force to trees planted on our
soil by another, provided, however, they have taken root in the earth.

​(75) The same rule also applies to grain which has been sowed by
another upon our land.

​(76) But if we bring an action against him to recover the land or the
building, and we refuse to pay him the expenses he has incurred in
constructing the building or in sowing the crop, we can be barred by

^[1]^ These rules regulating the acquisition and loss of the qualified
ownership in animals *feræ natural*, as well as those relating to
alluvial deposits, were adopted bodily from Roman jurisprudence by the
early writers on the Common Law, and are in. force to-day. "*Omnia
animalia que in terra & in mari & in cœlo & in aêre nascuntur vbicunq*
(*ubicunque*);*capiantur, et cu capta fuerint incipiunt esse mea; quia
mea custodia cœrcetur. & eadem ratione si euaserint custodiam meam & in
naturalem libertatem se receperint, desinunt esse mea & rursus fiunt
occupantis. Est autem alluuio latens incremetum. & p alluuione adjici
dicitur quod ita paulatim adjicitur, quod intelligere non possis quo
momento teporis adjicitur*." Bracton, *De Leg. et Consuet. Ang*. II, I,
9. — ed.

an exception on the ground of fraud, that is to say, if he was a
possessor in good faith.

​(77) It is settled by the same rule that whatever anyone has written on
my paper or parchment, even in letters of gold, is mine, because the
letters are merely accessory to the paper or parchment; but if I should
bring an action to recover the books or parchments, and do not reimburse
the party for the expense incurred in writing, I can be barred by an
exception on the ground of fraud.

​(78) If, however, anyone paints anything on a tablet belonging to me,
as for instance, a portrait, the contrary rule is adopted, for it is
said that the tablet is accessory to the painting; but a good reason for
this difference hardly exists. According to this rule it is certain that
if you bring an action for the portrait as yours, while I am in
possession of the same, and you do not pay me the value of the tablet,
you can be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud. But, if, you
are in possession, the result will be that I should be granted an
equitable action against you, in which instance unless I pay the
expenses of the painting, you can bar me by an exception on the ground
of fraud, just as if you were a possessor in good faith. It is clear
that if either you, or anyone else should steal the tablet, I will be
entitled to an action of theft.

​(79) Where the nature of the article is changed recourse to natural law
is also required. Hence, if you make wine, oil, or grain, out of my
grapes, olives, or heads of wheat, the question arises whether the said
wine, oil, or grain is mine or yours. Likewise, if you manufacture a
vase out of my gold or silver, or build a ship, a chest, or a bench with
my lumber, or you make a garment out of my wool, or mead out of my wine
and honey; or a plaster or eye-wash out of drugs belonging to me, the
question arises whether what you have made out of my property is yours
or mine. Certain authorities hold that the material or substance should
be taken into consideration, that is to say, that the article
manufactured should be deemed to be the property of him to whom the
material belongs, and this opinion was adopted by Sabinus and Cassius.
Others, however, hold that the article belongs to him who manufactured
it, and this doctrine was approved by authorities of the opposite
school, who also agreed that the owner of the material and substance was
entitled to an action of theft against the party who had appropriated
the property; and also that a personal action would not lie against him
because property which has been destroyed cannot be recovered; but,
notwithstanding this, personal actions can be brought against thieves
and certain other possessors.

V. Whether or not wards can alienate property.

​(80) We must next call attention to the fact that neither a woman nor a
ward can alienate property by mancipation without the authority of their
guardians, but a woman can alienate property not subject to mancipation
without such authority, which a ward cannot do.

​(81) Hence, if a woman lends money to anyone without the authority of
her guardian, for the reason that she transfers it to him, and as money
is not subject to sale, the borrower contracts an obligation.

​(82) If, however, a ward should do this, as he does not transfer the
money to the borrower, the latter does not contract an obligation; and
therefore the ward can recover his money, provided it is in existence;
that is to say he can claim it as his under quiritarian right, but a
woman can only recover the money by an action for debt. Hence the
question arises whether the ward who lent the money can, in any action
whatever recover it from the person who borrowed it if it has been
expended, as recovery must be had for a party in possession.

​(83) On the other hand, all property, whether subject to sale or not,
can be transferred to women and to wards without the authority of their
guardians; and this is granted them because their condition is improved
by the transaction.

​(84) Hence if a debtor pays any money to a ward, he transfers the
ownership of the same to him, but he himself is not released from
liability, for the reason that a ward cannot release a debtor from an
obligation without the authority of his guardian, as he is not permitted
to alienate any property without his guardian's consent; still, if he
receives any benefit from the money, and continues to demand payment of
the debt, he can be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud.

​(85) A woman, however, may be legally paid without the authority of her
guardian; and he who makes payment is released from liability, because,
as we have previously stated, women can, even without the authority of
their guardians, alienate property not mancipable. Although this rule
only applies where she actually received the money, still if she did not
receive it, but merely says that she has, and wishes to discharge her
debtor by giving him a formal release without the authority of her
guardian, she cannot do so.

​(86) Again, we acquire property not only by ourselves but through those
whom we have under our control, in our hand, or in *mancipium*. We can
also acquire it through slaves in whom we have the usufruct, as well as
through freemen, and slaves belonging to others whom we have possessed
in good faith. Let us now carefully examine these different cases.

​(87) Anything which our children, who are under our control, as well as
anything which our slaves acquire by sale, delivery, or stipulation, or
in any other manner whatsoever, is acquired for us; for he who is
subject to our authority can have nothing of his own. Hence if such a
person should be appointed an heir he cannot enter on the estate without
our order, and if he should do so under our direction the estate will be
acquired for us, just as if we ourselves had been appointed heirs; and
in accordance with this rule a legacy is acquired by such parties for us
in the same manner.

​(88) We should, however, note that where a slave belongs to one person
by bonitarian right, to another by quiritarian right, in every instance
whatever is acquired by him belongs to the party in whom the bonitarian
right is vested.

​(89) Not only is the ownership of property acquired for us by those
whom we have under our control, but possession is also; for if they
obtain possession of property we are considered to have possession of
the same, hence property can even be acquired through them by
usucaption.

​(90) Ownership is indeed acquired for us, in every instance, through
those persons whom we have in our hand or in *mancipium*, just as it is
by those who are under our control; but whether possession is also
acquired is a question, for the reason that we do not have possession of
the said persons.

​(91) Moreover, it has been decided with reference to slaves in whom we
only have an usufruct that anything which they acquire by the employment
of our own property, or by their labor, is acquired for our benefit; but
what they acquire by any other means belongs to the owner of the
property. Therefore, if a slave of this kind is appointed an heir, or a
legacy should be left to him, it would not be acquired for my benefit,
but for that of the owner of the property.

​(92) The same rule applies to anyone who is possessed by us in good
faith, whether he is free or the slave of another; for what has been
decided with reference to an usufructuary also holds good with reference
to a *bona fide* possessor; and hence any property which is acquired in
any other way than the two above mentioned will belong to the party
himself, if he is free, or to the owner, if he is a slave.

​(93) But after a *bona fide* possessor has obtained a slave by
usucaption,^[1]^ for the reason that he becomes his owner in this way,
any-

^[1]^ Usucaption was originally only applicable to corporeal property,
but was afterwards extended by custom so as to include incorporeal
hereditaments. It differed from prescription in that good faith was
absolutely essential to its operation; and was invented as a penalty to
be inflicted upon the actual owner for permitting his right to remain
unexercised or unclaimed through gross and inexcusable negligence.
Anyone who lost his property in this way was considered to have
transferred it: "*Videtur alienare qui patitur usucapi*."

Usucaption, as such, was recognized by the Common Law, and the doctrine
of the Twelve Tables, that it only applied to corporeal objects, was
accepted in all its rigidity. "*Incorporealia verò possideri non
poterunt, nec usucapi, nec sine corpore tradi, quia per se traditionem
non patirentur. Quasi possidere tamen non poterunt per patientiam & per
usum*." (Fleta, III, XV, 1.)

According to Bracton, no certain time for the title to vest was
established by law, but this was left entirely to the discretion of the
Court.

"*Rerum dominia transferuntur per usucaptionem s. p. longam, continuam
et pacificam possessionem, ex diuturno tempore et sine traditione; sed
quam longa esse debeat non definitur a jure, sed ex lustitiariorum
discretione."*(Bracton *De Leg. et Consuet, Ang*. II, 22.)

Prescription, at Common Law, was based on the enjoyment of a right from
time immemorial, and did not apply to land. It is now regulated by
statute, and in England depends upon uninterrupted use for twenty years,
where an easement is concerned. The ownership of immovable property is
acquired in France by continuous possession for ten years, if the true
owner resides within the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal; and for
twenty, if he does not. (Cod. *Civ*. Art. 2265); in Spain, for the same
periods, when the parties are present, or absent, (*Cod. Civ*. Art.
1957); in Portugal, for five years where possession, and for ten years
where the title of acquisition, is registered; in both cases from the
date of registry. (Cod. *Civ*. Art. 526); in Italy, for ten years where
all legal requirements have been corn-

thing which the slave may acquire will be for his benefit. An
usufructuary, however, cannot acquire a slave by usucaption; first,
because he does not have possession, but only the right of use and
enjoyment; and second, because he knows that the slave belongs to
another.

​(94) It is a matter of doubt whether we can hold possession of property
and acquire it by usucaption through a slave in whom we have the
usufruct, because we are not in possession of the slave. There is no
question, however, that we can both hold possession of property and
acquire it by usucaption, through a slave of whom we have possession in
good faith. But in both these cases we have reference to the distinction
which we explained above; that is to say, where the slave acquires
anything by means of our property, or by his own labor, it is acquired
for our benefit.

​(95) From this it is apparent that under no circumstances can property
be acquired for our benefit through freemen who are not subject to our
authority, and of whom we do not have possession in good faith, nor by
slaves belonging to others in whom we neither have the usufruct, nor of
whom we have legal possession. This is what is meant by the common
saying that property cannot be acquired for us through a stranger; and
the only question relating to possession is whether it can be acquired
for our benefit through a person who is free.

​(96) In conclusion, it should be remembered that nothing can be
surrendered in court by persons who are under the control, or in the
hand or mancipation of another, as nothing can belong to persons of this
description; and the result is that they cannot claim anything as their
own in court.

​(97) Up to this point it is sufficient to have stated how separate
property can be acquired by us; for we shall hereafter, and in a more
suitable place discuss the law of legacies, by which also we acquire
individual property. Now let us see in what ways property can be
acquired by us in the aggregate.

​(98) If we become the heirs of any person, or demand prætorian
possession of an estate, or purchase the inheritance of anyone, or adopt
anyone, or receive a wife in our hand; the entire property of any of
said persons passes to us.

​(99) And, first, let us discuss inheritances, the condition of which is
twofold; for an inheritance either comes to us by will, or on account of
intestacy.

​(100) And first we shall examine what comes to us by will.

plied with. (Cod. *Civ*. Art. 2137); in Japan, for from ten to twenty
years, where the party in interest has had undisturbed possession with
the intention of owning the property. (Civ. Cod. of Japan, Arts. 162,
163.) By the Civil Code of Louisiana ten or twenty years are required to
obtain a good title to immovable property by prescription, dependent
upon whether the owner resides in or out of the State; and three years
when title to chattels is involved. In former times, the right of
ownership to slaves was lost by uninterrupted possession for half the
time necessary for the acquisition of real-estate. Good faith was
indispensable in the abovementioned cases, and was always presumed.
(Civil Code of Louisiana, Arts. 3437, 3439, 3440, 3442, 3447.) — ed.

​(101) Originally there were two kinds of wills; for parties either made
a will at the *Comitia Calata*, which were assembled twice a year for
that purpose; or in the face of the enemy, that is to say when the
testator took up arms for the purpose of making war; for the term has
reference to an army ready and armed for service. Hence, persons made
one kind of a will in time of peace and tranquillity, and another when
about to go into battle.

​(102) Afterwards, a third kind of will was introduced, which was
executed by bronze and balance. Where a man who had not made a will at
the *Comitia Calata* or in the face of the enemy was apprehensive of
sudden death, he usually transferred his estate by sale to a friend, and
requested him to distribute it to whomever he desired to have it after
his death. This kind of testamentary disposition is styled a will by
bronze and balance, because it is effected by the ceremony of
mancipation.

​(103) The two kinds of wills above mentioned have, however, fallen into
disuse; and only the one effected by bronze and balance has been
retained, but it is now changed from what it was in ancient times. For
formerly the purchaser of the estate, that is to say the party who
received it by a sale from the testator, occupied the place of the heir,
and for this reason the testator directed him with reference to what he
desired to be given to anyone after his death. Now, however, another
person is appointed heir under the will who is charged with the
distribution of legacies, and differs from the one who, as a matter of
form and in imitation of the ancient law, represents the purchaser of
the estate.

​(104) This transaction takes place as follows: The party who executes
the will having, as in the case of other sales, called together five
Roman citizens of the age of puberty as witnesses, and a balance holder,
and having reduced his will to writing, sells his estate as a matter of
form to a certain person, and the said purchaser makes use of the
following words: "Let your family and money pass into my charge and
custody, and, in order that you may make your will properly in
accordance with the public law, let them be purchased by me with this
bronze" (or as some authorities add) "with this brazen balance." Then he
strikes the balance with the piece of bronze, and delivers the latter to
the testator as purchase money. Next the testator, holding the will in
his hands, says, "I do give and bequeath, and declare that I do so,
everything written in these tablets and this wax, and do you, Roman
citizens bear witness to my act." This ceremony is called nuncupation,
for this term means to declare publicly; and indeed what the testator
specially stated in writing in his will is considered to have been
declared and confirmed by this general affirmation.

​(105) Anyone who is under the control of, or belongs to the family of
the purchaser or to that of the testator himself, should not be one of
the witnesses; because, in imitation of the ancient law, the entire
transaction which takes place for the purpose of establishing the will
is considered to be carried on between the purchaser of the estate and
the testator; and in former times, as we stated above, anyone who pur-

chased the estate of the testator occupied the position of an heir, and
therefore the testimony of persons belonging to the family taken in a
proceeding of this kind was rejected.

​(106) Wherefore, if the purchaser of the estate is under the control of
his father, neither his father, nor anyone in the power of the latter,
for instance his brother, can be a witness. If, however, a son under
parental control, after his discharge from the army, should make a will
disposing of his *castrense peculium*, neither his father, nor anyone
who is subject to the authority of the latter, can be a witness.

​(107) We understand that the same rules which have been established
with reference to witnesses, also apply to the balance-holder, for he is
included in the number of witnesses.

​(108) Not only can he who is under the control of the heir or legatee,
or who is also under the control of the same person as the heir or the
legatee be a witness and a balance-holder, but the heir, or the legatee
himself, has a right to act in this capacity. Still, so far as the heir
is concerned, as well as with reference to him who is in his power, and
the party under whose control he himself is, we should not, by any
means, make use of this right.

Concerning military wills.

​(109) The rigid observation of these rules in the making of wills is
not required of soldiers, by the Imperial Constitutions on account of
their extreme want of legal knowledge. For, even if they should not
summon the lawful number of witnesses, or sell the property, or declare
the will to be theirs, they nevertheless have the right of testamentary
disposition.

​(110) Moreover, they are permitted to appoint even aliens and Latins as
their heirs or legatees; while under other circumstances aliens are
forbidden by the Civil Law from receiving estates and legacies, and
Latins are forbidden to do so by the *Lex Junta*.

​(111) Unmarried persons who are prohibited by the *Lex Julia* from
receiving estates or legacies, and likewise bereaved persons, that is to
say those who have no children and upon whom the *Lex Papia* forbids to
take more than half an estate or legacy, are not disqualified from
taking all of it under a military will.

​(112) A Decree of the Senate was enacted at the instance of the Divine
Hadrian, by which women were permitted to make a will even without the
ceremony of coemption; provided, however, they were not under twelve
years of age; and if they were not released from guardianship, they were
required to execute their wills with the consent of their guardians.

​(113) Females therefore appear to be in a better position than males,
but a male under the age of fourteen cannot make a will, even with the
authority of his guardian; but a female obtains the right of
testamentary disposition with the consent of her guardian, after she has
reached her twelfth year.

​(114) Hence, if we wish to know whether or not a will is valid, we must
ascertain in the first place whether the party who executed it had
testamentary capacity, and next, if he had it, we must learn whether he
made the will in accordance with the requirements of the Civil Law; with
the exception of soldiers, who, as we have stated, are, on account of
their want of legal knowledge, permitted to make a will in any way that
they may desire, and in any way that they can.

​(115) In order that a will may be valid under the Civil Law, it is not
sufficient that the rule which we have laid down above with reference to
the sale of an estate, the qualification of witnesses, and the
declaration of the testator should be observed.

​(116) But, above all things, it should be ascertained whether the
appointment of the heir was made in regular form; for, where the
appointment was made otherwise, it makes no difference whether the
estate of the testator was sold, the witnesses assembled, and the
declaration published in a proper manner, as we stated above.

​(117) The regular appointment of an heir is as follows: "Let Titius be
my heir." The following form at present seems to be approved, namely: "I
order that Titius be my heir." This one, however, "I desire Titius to be
my heir" is not recognized as correct; and the following expressions, "I
appoint Titius my heir," and "I make Titius my heir," are not admitted
as valid by the greater number of authorities.

​(118) Moreover, it should be observed that if a woman, who is under
guardianship, makes a will, she must do so with the consent of her
guardian; otherwise her will is void by the Civil Law.

​(119) The prætor, however, promises the heirs mentioned in the will to
place them in possession of the estate in accordance with the provisions
of the same, if the will is attested by the seals of seven witnesses,
and if there is no one to whom the estate will belong as heir-at-law
under the rule of intestacy; as, for example, a brother by the same
father, or a paternal uncle, or the son of a brother, the heirs
mentioned, in the will can retain the estate; "for the same rule of law
applies as in the case where a will is not valid for some other reason,
for instance because the estate was not sold, or the testator did not
utter the words required for the declaration.

​(120) But let us consider, even if there should be a brother or a
paternal uncle, whether the heirs mentioned in the will should be
preferred to them; for it is stated in a rescript of the Emperor
Antoninus that parties who have obtained prætorian possession of an
estate in accordance with the terms of a will not properly executed,
can, by means of an exception based on fraud defend themselves against
parties claiming the estate on the ground of intestacy.

​(121) It is certain that this rule applies to the wills of males as
well as to those of females which were not properly executed, as, for
example, where they did not make use of the mere formality of selling
the estate, or of speaking the words required for the declaration; and
we shall see whether this constitution also applies to the wills of
women which have been executed without the authority of their guardians.

​(122) We are not speaking, however, of those women who are under the
legal guardianship of their parents or patrons, but of those who have
guardians of another kind that are compelled, even if unwilling, to
grant their consent; otherwise it is evident that a parent or a patron
cannot be removed by a will made without his sanction.

​(123) Again, anyone who has a son under his control must take care
either to appoint him as his heir or to disinherit him by name;
otherwise, if he passes him over in silence this renders his will void.
To such an extent is this true, that our preceptors hold that even if
the son should die during the lifetime of his father, no one can be an
heir under the will, for the reason that the appointment was not valid
in the beginning. Authorities of the other school, however, are of the
opinion that although the son, if he is living at the time of his
father's death, becomes his father's heir on the ground of intestacy,
without being barred by the mention of the heirs in the will; still, if
he should die before his father, they hold that the said heirs can enter
on the estate under the will, without the son being any longer an
impediment; for the reason that they think that the will was not valid
from the beginning, on account of the son having been passed over.

​(124) If, however, the testator should pass over others of her
children, the testament is valid, but the persons who have been passed
over will have a right, with the heirs mentioned therein, to equal
shares of the estate, if they are proper heirs; and to half of it if
they are strangers. For example, if anyone should appoint his three sons
his heirs, but should pass over his daughter, the daughter will become a
co-heir to a fourth part of the estate; and for this reason will obtain
the same share that she would have been entitled to if her father had
died intestate; but if he should appoint foreign heirs, and pass over
his daughter, the latter will be entitled to half of his estate. What we
have mentioned with reference to a daughter we understand to apply to a
grandson and to all the children of a son, of both sexes.

​(125) What course then should be pursued? Although according to what we
have stated the heirs mentioned in the will are only deprived of half
the estate by the children of the testator, still, as the prætor
promises to give the latter possession contrary to the provisions of the
will, and according to this rule, foreign heirs arc excluded from the
entire estate, and merely become heirs without obtaining any of the
property,

​(126) We formerly made use of this law as no difference between females
and males existed; but the Emperor Antoninus recently stated in a
rescript that women who were proper heirs could not obtain more by
acquiring prætorian possession of an estate than they would by the right
of accrual. This rule should also be observed in the case of daughters
who have been emancipated; that is, they will obtain the same amount
through prætorian possession of the property as they would have obtained
by the right of accrual, if they had remained under the control of their
father.

​(127) A son, however, must be expressly disinherited by his father,
otherwise he is not considered to have been disinherited. A son is held
to be expressly disinherited when the following expressions are used,
"Let my son Titius be disinherited"; or "Let my son be disinherited";
without mentioning his name.

​(128) Other children of both sexes may be properly disinherited, among
others, by the use of the following words: "Let all those remaining be
disinherited"; which words are usually added after the appointment of
the heirs. This, however, is only prescribed by the Civil Law.

​(129) For the prætor requires all descendants of the male sex that is
to say sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons, to be disinherited by name;
but he considers it sufficient if descendants of the female sex, that is
to say, daughters, granddaughters, and great-granddaughters, are either
disinherited by name, or among others.

​(130) Posthumous children must be either appointed heirs, or
disinherited.

​(131) In this respect the condition of all is the same, so that if a
posthumous son, or any other child of either sex is passed over, the
will is indeed valid; but after the birth of the posthumous child it
will be broken, and for this reason will be absolutely void. Therefore,
if a woman who is expected to give birth to a posthumous child should
have an abortion, there will be nothing to prevent the heirs mentioned
in the will from entering on the estate.

​(132) Persons of the female sex are either expressly, or generally
disinherited, but if they are disinherited with others, something must
be bequeathed to them in order that they may not appear to have been
passed over through forgetfulness. It has been decided, however, that
persons of the male sex cannot legally be disinherited unless this is
done expressly, for instance as follows: "Let any son who may be born to
me be disinherited." . . . .^[1]^

​(133) In the same category with posthumous children are placed those
who, by succeeding as proper heirs, become such to their relatives, just
as posthumous children are by birth. For example, if I have a son, and
by him a grandson, or a granddaughter in his power, because the son
precedes by a degree, he alone enjoys the rights of a proper heir;
although the grandson and granddaughter by him are both under the same
authority. If, however, my son should die during my lifetime, or should,
for any reason whatsoever, be released from my control, the grandson and
granddaughter will succeed to his place, and in this way acquire the
rights of proper heirs just as if they were posthumous children.

​(134) Therefore, to avoid my will being broken in this way, just as I
must appoint either my son my heir, or expressly disinherit him,
otherwise my will will not be valid; so it is necessary for me to
appoint my grandson or granddaughter my heir, or disinherit them; lest,
if my son should die during my lifetime, my said grandson or
granddaughter, by succeeding to his place, may break my will in the same
way as if they had been posthumous children. This is provided by the
*Lex Junia Vellæa*, in which the method of disinheritance is prescribed,
that is to say, posthumous children of the male sex shall be expressly

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

disinherited, and those of the female sex shall be disinherited
expressly, or generally with others; provided, however, that something
is bequeathed to those who are disinherited with others.

​(135) It is not necessary for children emancipated by the Civil Law to
either be appointed heirs, or disinherited, for the reason that they are
not proper heirs. The prætor, however, orders all children of both sexes
to be disinherited if they are not appointed heirs; if they are of the
male sex they must be expressly mentioned, and if of the female sex they
must either be expressly mentioned, or disinherited among others; and if
they are neither appointed heirs nor disinherited the prætor, as we have
stated above, promises to grant them possession of the estate in
opposition to the terms of the will.

(135a) Children who have been granted Roman citizenship along with their
father, are not subject to his authority, if at the time citizenship was
granted or afterwards, the father did not petition to retain them under
his control — and the rule is the same if he did petition but did not
succeed — for children who are placed under the control of their father
by the Emperor differ in no respect from those who are subject to his
authority from their birth.

​(136) Again, adopted children, as long as they remain in this
condition, occupy the place of natural children; but when they have been
emancipated by their adoptive father, they are not included among his
children, either by the Civil Law, or by the Edict of the Prætor.

​(137) On the other hand, for this reason it happens that as long as
they remain in the adoptive family, they are considered as strangers so
far as their natural father is concerned; but if they should be
emancipated by their adoptive father, they will then be in the same
condition as they would have been had they been emancipated by their
natural father.

​(138) If anyone, after having made a will, should either adopt a son,
who is his own master, in an assembly of the people, or one who is under
the control of his parent through the intervention of the Prætor, his
testament will undoubtedly be broken, just as it would have been by the
subsequent birth of a proper heir.

​(139) The same rule applies where, after having made a will, a wife
comes into the hand of the testator, or he marries a woman who is in his
hand; for in this way she takes the place of a daughter, and becomes a
proper heir.

​(140) It makes no difference whether either of the parties adopted was
appointed an heir by the will, for, so far as their disinheritance is
concerned, the question would seem to be superfluous; as, at the time
the will was made, they were not included in the number of proper heirs.

​(141) Likewise, a son who has been manumitted after the first or second
sale, breaks a will previously executed; for the reason that he is
restored to the authority of his father, and it makes no difference
whether he was appointed an heir, or disinherited by the said will.

​(142) The same rule formerly applied to one for whose benefit proof of
error is permitted by the Decree of the Senate, for the reason that he
was born of an alien, or of a Latin woman who was married with the
understanding that she was a Roman citizen; for, whether he was
appointed heir, or disinherited by his father, or whether, during the
lifetime of the latter, the error was proved, or this was done after his
death; the will was absolutely broken, as by the birth of a posthumous
child.

​(143) Now, however, by a late Decree of the Senate enacted at the
instance of the Divine Hadrian, if the error is proved during the
lifetime of the father, the will is in every instance broken, as in
former times; but where it is proved after the death of the father, if
the son was passed over in silence, the will is broken. But if he was
mentioned in it as the heir, or disinherited, the will is not broken, in
order that carefully executed wills may not be rescinded at a time when
they cannot be renewed.

​(144) A former will is revoked by one subsequently executed; nor does
it make any difference whether an heir ever appears or not, for it only
is considered whether he might take under it if he did appear.
Therefore, if the heir appointed by the last will, which was legally
executed, is unwilling to take under the same; or if he should die
during the lifetime of the testator, or after the death of the latter,
and before he had entered upon the estate; or if he should be excluded
for not having accepted the estate within the prescribed time, or on
account of the condition under which he was appointed not having been
complied with; or by the *Lex Julia* on account of celibacy; in all
these cases the testator dies intestate; for the first will having been
revoked by the subsequent one is not valid, and the last will also has
no effect, as there is no heir under it.

​(145) Wills legally executed may become void in another way, as for
instance, when he who executed the will loses his civil rights, and how
this may happen was stated in the First Commentary.

​(146) Moreover, in a case of this kind we say that a will may become
inoperative; for although wills which are revoked, and those which in
the beginning are not legally executed are alike invalid, and those
which have been properly executed become invalid on account of loss of
civil rights, they, nevertheless, may be said to be rescinded; still,
for the reason that it is more convenient for the different cases to be
designated by different names, some of these wills are said not to have
been legally executed, and others which have been legally executed are
either broken or become void.

​(147) However, wills which in the beginning were not legally executed,
or if they were legally executed afterwards became void, or were
revoked, are still not absolutely inoperative; for if they have been
sealed with the signets of seven witnesses, the appointed heir can
demand possession of the estate in accordance with the provisions of the
will, provided the deceased testator was a Roman citizen and his own
master at the time of his death; but if the will became inoperative, for
example, because the testator lost his citizenship or his freedom, or
gave himself in adoption, and he dies under the control of his adoptive

father, he cannot demand possession of the estate in accordance with the
provisions of the will.

​(148) Therefore, those who obtain prætorian possession of an estate in
accordance with the provisions of a will which was not properly executed
in the first place, or which if it was properly executed, was
subsequently broken, or became void; provided they can establish their
right to the estate can obtain actual possession of the same. If,
however, they can be deprived of the estate by some one having a better
claim they will be entitled only to nominal possession.

​(149) For, if anyone has been appointed heir under the Civil Law by
either a former or a subsequent will; or is the heir-at-law to an
intestate estate, he can deprive the nominal possessor of the same; but,
if no one else is an heir under the Civil Law, the possessor can retain
the estate, nor will cognates, who have no legal title, have any right
to deprive him of it.

(149a) Sometimes, however, as we have mentioned above, heirs who were
appointed by will are preferred to heirs-at-law; for instance if the
will was not legally executed either because the estate was not sold, or
because the testator did not utter the formula of declaration; for if
the agnates of the deceased should claim the estate they can be barred
on the ground of fraud in accordance with the Constitution of the Divine
Antoninus.

​(150) Prætorian possessors of an estate are not excluded under the
provisions of the *Lex Julia*, by which estates which have no heirs are
ordered to escheat to the government, if the deceased left no successor
of any kind.

​(151) A will legally executed may be rendered void by the expression of
a contrary intention, but it is evident that it cannot be rendered
inoperative by such an intention alone; because after the testator was
unwilling that it should stand, and even if he went so far as to cut the
cord with which it was tied, it will, nevertheless, continue to be valid
under the Civil Law. Moreover, if he should erase or burn the will, what
he wrote will still be valid, although the proof of it may be difficult.

What then should be done? If anyone demands prætorian possession of an
estate on the ground of intestacy, and he who is appointed by the will
claims it, the latter may, in this instance, be excluded by an exception
on the ground of fraud, provided it is proved to have been the intention
of the testator that the estate should go to those entitled to the same
as heirs-at-law; and this rule is set forth in a rescript of the Emperor
Antoninus.

​(152) Again, heirs are either designated necessary, or necessary and
proper, or foreign heirs.

​(153) A necessary heir is a slave appointed with the grant of his
freedom; and he is so called because at the death of the testator,
whether he is willing or unwilling, he at once becomes free and his
heir.

​(154) For this reason anyone who suspects that he is insolvent, usually
appoints his slave his heir with the grant of his freedom as a
substitute in the second or any inferior degree; so that, if his
creditors are not satisfied in full, the property of his estate may be
sold rather as belonging to the heir than to the testator himself, and
the disgrace which results from the sale of the property of an insolvent
estate may attach rather to the heir than to the testator; although as
was held by Sabinus, according to Fufidius, that he ought not to suffer
ignominy because the sale of the property of the estate was not caused
by his fault but through the requirements of the law. We, however, adopt
a different view.

​(155) As a recompense for this inconvenience, the benefit is conferred
upon the slave of acquiring for himself everything which 'he obtains
after the death of his patron, whether it was reserved for him before or
after the sale of the property; and although only a part of the claim
may have been paid by the proceeds of the sale, his subsequently
acquired property cannot again be sold on account of the debts of the
estate, unless he should have acquired something on account of his being
the heir, for example, the estate of a Latin freedman, and thereby have
become more wealthy; while if the property of other persons when sold
only pays a portion of the indebtedness, and they afterwards acquire any
other property, the latter may be sold time and again.

​(156) Proper and necessary heirs are, for instance, a son or a
daughter, a grandson or a granddaughter by a son, and their descendants,
provided they were under the control of the testator at the time of his
death. In order, however, that a grandson or a granddaughter may become
a proper heir, it is not sufficient for him or her to have been under
the control of their grandfather at the time of his death, but it is
necessary that their father should, during the lifetime of his father,
have ceased to be a proper heir, either on account of death, or because
of having been released from parental control in any other way
whatsoever, for then the grandson or granddaughter will succeed to the
place of his or her father.

​(157) They are called proper heirs because they are family heirs, and
even during the lifetime of their parent are to a certain extent
considered to be joint owners of the estate, and therefore where anyone
dies intestate, the first right to the succession belongs to his
children. They are called necessary heirs for the reason that, under all
circumstances, whether they are willing or unwilling, they become heirs
in case of intestacy, as well as under the will.

​(158) The prætor, however, permits them to relinquish the succession,
in order that the estate of their father may be sold for the payment of
debts.

​(159) The same rule applies to the case of a wife who is in the hand of
her husband, because she occupies the place of a daughter; as well as to
a daughter-in-law who is in the hand of a son of the testator; for the
reason that she occupies the place of a granddaughter.

​(160) Moreover, the prætor gives the same power to reject an estate to
one *in mancipium*, who has been appointed heir with the grant of
freedom, although he is merely a necessary heir, and not a proper one,
as is the case with a slave.

​(161) Others who are not subject to the control of the testator are
designated foreign heirs. Therefore, children who are not under our
control when appointed heirs by us, are considered as strangers, for
which reason children who are appointed heirs by their mother are also
included in this class because women cannot have children subject to
their authority. In like manner, slaves who are appointed heirs with the
grant of their freedom, and are afterwards manumitted by their owner,
are included in the same class.

​(162) Moreover, power is granted to foreign heirs to deliberate whether
they will, or will not, accept an estate.

​(163) If, however, one who has the power to reject an estate should
interfere with the property of the same, or one who is permitted to
deliberate as to whether he will enter on an estate or not, should
accept it, he has no power to reject it afterwards, unless he is a minor
under twenty-five years of age; for the prætor comes to the relief of
persons of this age when they rashly accept an estate which is injurious
to them; as in all other cases where they are deceived. I remember that
the Divine Hadrian even excused a person over the age of twenty-five
years, where, after he had entered on an estate, a great debt was
discovered, which at the time of the acceptance of the estate was not
known to exist.

​(164) Time to make up their minds, that is to say, a certain term for
deliberation, is usually granted to foreign heirs in order that they may
enter upon an estate within the prescribed period, and if they do not do
so, they are barred from accepting it. Hence this is called "*cretio*,"
for the reason that the word "*cernere*" means, in one sense, to decide
and to determine.^[1]^

​(165) Therefore, after the following clause: "Titius, be my heir," we
should add: "and within a hundred days after you learn of your
appointment, and are able to do so, you must state whether you accept or
not; and if you do not do so, you shall be disinherited."

​(166) And if an heir appointed in this manner desires to accept, he
should do so within the prescribed time, that is to say he should utter
the following words: "As Publius Mævius appointed me his heir by his
will, I decide to accept the estate"; but if he should not make such a
declaration, after the time has elapsed he shall be excluded; nor will
it be of any benefit to him to act as the heir, that is to say, for him
to make use of the property of the estate just as if he were the heir.

​(167) But if an heir should be appointed without giving him time for
deliberation, or be called to the succession as heir-at-law on the

^[1]^ By the Roman law, the beneficiary under a will was not permitted
to accept or reject the estate until the death of the testator; before
which event, of course, title to it could not vest. The *cretio* was
adopted for the purpose of enabling creditors to present and collect
their claims within a reasonable time. If the declaration of acceptance
was not made within the period specified, the heir forfeited all his
rights under the will. So long as the inheritance was not accepted, it
was held, by a legal fiction, to personally represent the deceased,
"*Personam defuncti sustinet*," who was presumed still to have
possession. — ed.

ground of intestacy, he can, either by deliberating or as acting as the
heir, or by the mere intention of accepting the estate, become the heir,
and he will be free to accept at any time, when he may desire to do so;
but the Prætor, on the demand of the creditors of the estate, usually
fixes a time within which if the party may enter on it if he wishes; and
if he does not, the creditors may be permitted to sell the property of
the deceased.

​(168) But, just as one who has been appointed heir with time for
deliberation does not actually become the heir unless he formally
accepts the estate, so he will not be excluded unless he fails to make
the declaration to that effect within the prescribed time; and,
therefore, although before the time has expired he may have decided not
to accept the estate, still, by having changed his mind and declared
that he will accept, before the time for deliberation has elapsed, he
can become the heir.

​(169) But just as he who was appointed heir without time for
deliberation, or who was called to the succession as heir-at-law on the
ground of intestacy, becomes heir by the mere expression of his will;
so, by a contrary statement he is immediately excluded from the
inheritance,

​(170) Moreover, every period granted for deliberation has a prescribed
limit, and in such cases a reasonable time is considered to be a hundred
days. Still, by the Civil Law, a longer or a shorter period can be
granted, though the Prætor sometimes shortens a longer one.

​(171) Although the time for deliberation is limited to certain days,
still, one kind of limitation is designated common and the other
certain; common, being that which we have described above, that is,
where the following words: "When he has learned of it, and is able," are
added; certain, is that in which other words are written instead of
those above mentioned.

​(172) A great difference exists between these two grants of time, for
in the common one no days are computed except those during which the
party knows that he has been appointed heir, and is able to decide; but
where a certain time has been granted, notwithstanding the party may not
know that he has been appointed heir, the days are reckoned
continuously; and, likewise, if for any reason he is prevented from
stating his decision, or, further, if he has been appointed heir under
some condition, the time will still continue to be reckoned, and hence
it is better and more convenient to make use of the common method.

​(173) This certain period of computation is called continuous for the
reason that the days are reckoned without cessation; but, still, on
account of the harshness of this method, the other is ordinarily
employed, and hence is styled common.

Concerning substitutions.

​(174) Sometimes, we appoint two or more degrees of heirs in the
following manner: "Lucius Titius, be my heir, and make your declaration
within the next hundred days after you know of your appointment, and are
able to do so; and if you should not announce your decision in this
manner, you shall be disinherited. Then you, Mævius, be my heir, and
announce your decision within a hundred days, etc." And afterwards we
can make as many substitutions as we desire.

​(175) We are permitted to substitute one or several persons in the
place of one; and, on the other hand, to substitute one or several in
the place of several.

​(176) Therefore, where the heir is appointed in the first degree he
becomes such by acceptance and the substitute is excluded; if he does
not declare his acceptance, he will be excluded, even if he acts as
heir, and the substitute will succeed in his stead; and if there are
several degrees in succession, the same thing takes place under this
rule in every instance.

​(177) Where, however, the time for acceptance is fixed without
mentioning disinheritance, that is to say as follows: "If you do not
announce your acceptance of the estate, then let Publius Mævius be my
heir," a different rule will apply; for if the party first appointed —
even though he does not announce his acceptance — acts as heir, the
substitute is only admitted to share in the estate, and both parties
become heirs to equal portions of the same; and if he neither announces
his acceptance, nor acts as heir, he will then be excluded from the
entire estate, and the substitute will succeed to the whole of it.

​(178) It was held by Sabinus that a substitute is not admitted as long
as the heir first in degree has the right to announce his decision, even
though he should have acted as heir, and in that way have become the
heir; but that when the time prescribed for making a decision has
expired, the substitute could be admitted, instead of the party who had
been acting as heir. It was held by others, however, that even while the
term prescribed for making the decision was pending the heir, by the
exertion of authority as such, would admit the substitute to share in
the estate, and that the former could not again revert to his right to
decide.

​(179) As we have stated above, we can not only appoint a substitute for
our children under the age of puberty, who are subject to our authority,
that is, if we have another heir and they should fail to inherit; but
also even if they should become our heirs and die before reaching the
age of puberty, another may be their heir; as for example, "Let my son
Titius be my heir; and if my son does not become my heir, or if he
should do so and die before he becomes his own guardian, then let Seius
be my heir."

​(180) In this instance, if the son does not become the heir, the
substitute will be the heir to the father; but if the son should become
the heir and die before reaching puberty, the substitute will become the
heir to the son himself. On this account there are, as it were, two
wills, one that of the father, the other that of the son, just as if the
son himself had appointed an heir; or, in fact, there is one will
disposing of two estates.

​(181) However, in order that the minor may not be subjected to the risk
of treachery after the death of his parent, it is the usual practice to
make the substitution publicly, that is to say, in the same part of the
will in which we appoint the minor our heir; for as ordinary
substitution only calls a substitute to the succession if the minor
should not become the heir, which takes place where he dies while his
parent is still living; in which instance we cannot suspect the
substitute of being guilty of foul play, as during the lifetime of the
testator everything which is contained in the will is unknown.

A substitution like the one above mentioned by which, even if the minor
should become an heir but should die before attaining the age of
puberty, we call the substitute to the succession, is one which we.
write separately on tablets subsequently executed, and seal up by our
own cord and wax after having provided in the first tablets that those
written afterwards shall not be opened before he reaches the age of
puberty.

It is much safer, however, for both kinds of substitution to be sealed
up in different tablets subsequently executed, for if this should be
done, or separate substitutions be made, as we have stated, it can be
understood from the first that the same substitution is made in the
second.

​(182) Not only where children under the age of puberty are appointed
heirs, can we make a substitution for them, so that, if they should die
before attaining puberty, the person whom we designated shall be our
heir, but this will even be the case if they are disinherited;
therefore, in this instance, if anything should be acquired by the minor
from the estates of relatives either by inheritance, legacies, or
donations, it will all belong to the substitute.

​(183) What we have stated with reference to the substitution for
children under the age of puberty, whether they have been appointed
heirs or disinherited, we understand also to apply to posthumous
children.

​(184) We cannot, however, appoint a substitute for a stranger who is
appointed an heir in such a way that if the stranger should become the
heir and die within a certain time, another shall be his heir; but we
are only permitted to bind him by means of a trust to transfer our
estate, either wholly or in part, and what this rule is we shall explain
in its proper place.

​(185) Freemen as well as slaves, whether they belong to us or to
others, may be appointed heirs.

​(186) A slave belonging to us must, however, be appointed heir and
declared to be free at the same time, that is to say, in the following
manner: "Let Stichus, my slave, be free and my heir," or "Let him be my
heir and be free."

​(187) For if he is appointed heir without the grant of his freedom,
even if he should subsequently be manumitted by his owner, he cannot be
the heir, because his appointment, in the first place, is not valid, and
therefore although he may have been alienated, he cannot declare his
acceptance of the estate, even by the order of his new master.

​(188) When a slave is appointed with the grant of his freedom, and
remains in the same condition he becomes free by the terms of the will,
and hence is a necessary heir. If, however, he should be manumitted by
the testator himself, he can use his own discretion as to entering on
the estate. If he is alienated, he should enter on the estate by the
order of his new master, for which reason the latter becomes the heir
through him, as he himself cannot be either the heir, or free.

​(189) When a slave belonging to another is appointed heir and he
remains in the same condition, he should enter on the estate by the
order of his master. If, however, he has been alienated by him, either
during the lifetime of the testator, or after the death of the latter,
before he makes up his mind whether he will accept the estate or not, he
must act by the order of his new master; but if he has been manumitted,
he can use his own judgment as to the acceptance of the estate.

​(190) If, however, a slave belonging to another is appointed heir with
the period usually allowed for acceptance, it is understood only to date
from the time when the slave himself knew that he had been appointed
heir, and no obstacle existed to prevent him from notifying his master,
in order that he might accept the estate by his order.

​(191) Let us next consider legacies, a part of the law which does not
seem to have any reference to the subject under consideration, for we
are discussing these legal titles by which rights are acquired by us in
the aggregate; but we have, at all events, to discuss wills and
testamentary heirs, and it is not without reason that this legal subject
should, in the next place be examined.

Concerning legacies.

​(192) There are four kinds of legacies, for we either make bequests by
asserting a claim, by condemnation, by permission, or by way of
preference.

​(193) We bequeath legacies by way of claim as follows: "I give and
bequeath my slave Stichus to Lucius Titius"; or if only one of the
expressions, "I give" or "I bequeath" be employed, the legacy is
properly bequeathed by way of claim, and the prevailing opinion is that
if the bequest was made in the following language: "Let him take," or
"Let him have for himself," or "Let him seize"; the legacy will also be
bequeathed as a claim.

​(194) .A legacy bequeathed in this manner is so called because after
the estate has been entered upon, the property immediately vests in the
legatee by quiritarian right; and if the legatee claims the property
from the heir, or from anyone else who has it in his possession, he
should bring an action to recover it, that is to say, claim that the
property is his by quiritarian right.

​(195) Jurists differ only upon one point, namely, Sabinus, Cassius, and
our other preceptors hold that what has been bequeathed in this manner
becomes the property of the legatee as soon as the estate has been
accepted, even if he is ignorant that the legacy was left to him; but
that after he does know it, and has rejected it, the legacy will no
longer be valid. Nerva, Proculus, and the authorities of the other

school, however, do not think that the bequest becomes the property of
the legatee if he should refuse to accept it. But at present, in
accordance with the terms of a Constitution of the Divine Pius
Antoninus, the opinion of Proculus seems to be the one which has been
adopted; for when a Latin was bequeathed to a colony in this manner, the
Emperor said: "Let the decurions deliberate whether they wish him to be
their property, just as if he had been bequeathed to an individual."

​(196) Only those things can be legally bequeathed, subject to be
claimed, which belonged to the testator himself by quiritarian right. It
has been decided however, that those, which are estimated by weight,
number, or measure are required to only belong to the testator by
quiritarian right at the time of his death; as for instance, wine, oil,
grain, and coin. It has also been held that other property must have
belonged to the testator by quiritarian right at both times; that is to
say, when he made the will, and when he died, otherwise the legacy will
be void.

​(197) This, however, is the rule only under the Civil Law. Subsequently
a Decree of the Senate was enacted at the instance of the Emperor Nero,
by which it was provided that if a testator bequeathed anything which
had never belonged to him, the legacy would be valid just as if it had
been left in the most approved manner, "the most approved manner"
meaning where it is left by condemnation, m which way property belonging
to another can be bequeathed, as will appear hereafter.

​(198) If anyone should bequeath property belonging to him, and, after
having made his will, should alienate it. the greater number of
authorities hold that the legacy is not only void under the Civil Law,
but that it does not become valid by the Decree of the Senate.

This opinion was promulgated for the reason that even if anyone should
bequeath his property by condemnation, and afterwards should alienate
it, many authorities think that although, by strict law, the legacy is
still due, if the legatee demands it, he can be barred by an exception
on the ground of fraud as claiming something contrary to the intention
of the deceased.

​(199) It has been established that if the same property is bequeathed
by way of claim to two or more persons, whether jointly or severally,
and all of them demand the legacy, each of them is only entitled to a
certain portion of the same; and if any share is rejected it will vest
in the co-legatee. A legacy bequeathed jointly as follows: "I do give
and bequeath my slave Stichus to Titius and Seius"; severally, as
follows: "I do give and bequeath my slave Stichus to Titius," "I do give
and bequeath the same slave to Seius."

​(200) Where a legacy is bequeathed as a claim, conditionally, the
question arises to whom does it belong while the condition is pending?
Our preceptors hold that it belongs to the heirs, as in the case of a
slave to be conditionally free, that is to say, a slave who has been
ordered to be free by a will under a certain condition, and who, it is
established, in the meantime belongs to the heir. The authorities of the
other school however, think, that the property does not belong to anyone
in the meantime; and they assert that this rule applies even more
forcibly in the case where a legacy has been bequeathed absolutely,
before the legatee has accepted it.

​(201) We bequeath a legacy by condemnation, as follows: "Let my heir be
condemned to give my slave Stichus"; or if it is only written, "Let him
give my slave Stichus"; this is a legacy by condemnation.

​(202) By this same form of a bequest property belonging to another can
also be bequeathed, so that the heir will be obliged to purchase either
the article referred to and deliver it, or pay its estimated value.

​(203) Any property which is not yet in existence may be bequeathed by
condemnation provided it comes into existence hereafter; as for
instance, any crops which may be produced on such-and-such land, or any
child which may be born from such-and-such a female slave.

​(204) Any bequest made in this way, after an estate has been entered
on, even though it has been made unconditionally, unlike a bequest left
to be claimed, is not immediately acquired by the legatee, but still
belongs to the heir, and therefore the legatee must bring an action to
recover it, that is to say, he must allege that the heir is required to
transfer it to him; and then if the property is subject to mancipation,
the heir should either transfer it to him in this way, or surrender it
in court, and give him possession. If, however, it is not subject to
mancipation, it will be sufficient if he merely delivers it, for if he
should only deliver but not sell anything susceptible of mancipation,
the legatee will obtain complete ownership only by usucaption; and as we
have mentioned in another place, usucaption of movable property is
acquired after a year's possession, and real property after possession
for the term of two years.

​(205) Another distinction exists between a bequest by claim and one by
condemnation; for where property is left to two or more persons by
condemnation, and this is done jointly, each is entitled to a certain
share, as in the case where a legacy is bequeathed by claim; but if the
bequest is made severally the entire amount is due to each legatee, and
the result is that the heir must deliver the article itself to one and
pay its value to another. In a joint bequest, a share which has lapsed
does not belong to the co-legatee, but remains a part of the estate.

​(206) What we have stated with reference to the lapsed share of a
legacy bequeathed by condemnation remaining as a part of the estate, and
where it is left as a claim, accruing to the co-legatee, we should
observe was established by the Civil Law before the enactment of the
*Lex Papia*; but after the *Lex Papia* a lapsed share of the legacy is
considered to have no owner, and belongs to those who are mentioned in
the will as having children.

​(207) And although heirs who have children have the best right to a
legacy which is considered to have no owner, and heirs who have no
children have the next best right to the same; still, it is stated by
the *Lex Papia* itself that a co-legatee who has children shall be
preferred to heirs, even though they also may have them.

​(208) It is held by the greater number of authorities with reference to
the rights conferred upon joint legatees by the *Lex Papia*, that it
makes no difference whether the legacy is bequeathed by claim or by
condemnation.

​(209) We make a bequest by permission as follows: "Let my heir be
condemned to permit Lucius Titius to take and to have my slave as his
own."

​(210) This kind of a legacy has a broader application than one
bequeathed by claim, but a narrower one than a bequest by condemnation,
for in this way a testator can legally bequeath not only his own
property, as well as that of his heirs; while by claim he can only
bequeath his own property, and by condemnation he can bequeath any
property belonging to any stranger whomsoever.

​(211) If the property bequeathed belonged either to the testator
himself or to his heirs at the time of his death, it is clear that the
legacy is valid, even if at the time of making the will the property
belonged to neither of them.

​(212) If, after the death of the testator, the property vests in the
heir, the question arises whether the legacy is valid; and most
authorities hold that it is not. What then is the law? Although anyone
can bequeath property which never belonged to the testator, and never
after his death belonged to his heir, by the Decree of the Senate
promulgated during the reign of Nero, all bequests are considered as
having been left by condemnation.

​(213) Just as property left by condemnation does not immediately belong
to the legatee as soon as the estate has been entered upon, but remains
the property of the heir until he transfers it to the legatee, either by
delivery, sale, or surrender in court; so, in the form of bequest by
permission the same rule applies; and therefore a personal action is
also brought in the name of a legatee of this kind to recover or
enforce, "Whatever the heir is required by the will to give or to
perform."

​(214) Nevertheless, some authorities are of the opinion that an heir is
not bound by this kind of a legacy, either to sell the property,
surrender it in court, or deliver it; but that it will be sufficient for
him to permit the legatee to take the property, because the testator did
not order him to do anything else than to grant him permission, that is
to say, to allow the legatee to have it for himself.

​(215) A more important distinction arises with reference to a legacy of
this description, where the same property is left separately to two or
more persons; for some authorities hold that each one is entitled to the
whole, as where a bequest is left by claim; and others think that the
condition of the first occupant is the better one, because in this kind
of a legacy the heir is condemned to permit the legatee to have the
property, and the consequence is, that if he allows the first one to
take it, and he does so, he will be secure against anyone who afterwards
demands the legacy from him; for the reason that he neither has the
property so as to permit it to be taken by the second claimant, nor was
he guilty of fraud in order to avoid having possession of the same.

​(216) We bequeath property by a preferred legacy as follows: "Let
Lucius Titius have my slave Stichus as a preferred legacy."

​(217) Our preceptors, however, hold that property cannot be bequeathed
in this way to anyone except to a person who has been appointed heir to
a certain share of an estate, for to take as a preferred legatee is to
receive something more than what he is entitled to as heir; and he only
can do so who has been appointed heir to a certain part of the estate,
and is entitled to it as a preferred legacy over and above his share of
the said estate.

​(218) Therefore, if a legacy of this kind is bequeathed to a stranger,
it will be void, and to such an extent is this true that Sabinus was of
the opinion that the defect could not even be remedied by the Decree of
the Senate of Nero; for he says that by this decree only those faults
are corrected which render a bequest invalid under the Civil Law, and
not such as have reference to the person of the legatee. It was,
however, held by Julian and Sextus that, even in this instance, the
legacy was rendered valid by the Decree of the Senate, for it might
happen, in a case of this kind, that by the words employed a legacy
would be void at civil law; and hence it is clear that a proper bequest
could be made to the same person by other words, for example, by claim,
by condemnation, or by permission, for then the legacy is not valid on
account of the defect in the person of the legatee, as when it is
bequeathed to one to whom it can, under no circumstances, be left, as
for instance, to an alien who cannot receive anything by a will; in
which case it is evident that the Decree of the Senate does not apply.

​(219) Likewise, our preceptors are of the opinion that a bequest made
in this manner can be recovered by the party to whom it was bequeathed,
in no other way than by the action for partition of the estate, that is
to say, for the purpose of dividing the same; for it is part of the duty
of the judge to decide with reference to the bequest of a preferred
legacy.

​(220) From this we understand that, according to the opinion of our
preceptors, nothing can be left as a preferred legacy except what
belongs to the testator; for no other property than that forming part of
an estate can become the subject of this action. Hence, if a testator
should, in this manner, bequeath property which is not his own, the
bequest will be void by the Civil Law, but will be rendered valid by the
Decree of the Senate. In one instance, however, they admit that property
belonging to another may be left as a preferred legacy, as, for
instance, where anyone bequeaths property which he has transferred to
his creditors by a fiduciary sale; for they hold that it is the duty of
the judge to compel the co-heirs to release the property from liability
by payment of the debt, so that he to whom it has been bequeathed may be
able to obtain it as a preferred legacy.

​(221) Authorities of the other school are of the opinion that a
preferred legacy may be bequeathed even to a stranger, just as if it
were written in the will as follows: "Let Titius take my slave Stichus,"
and that the addition "as a preferred legacy" is superfluous; and
therefore that the legacy would appear to be left by claim; and this
opinion is said to be confirmed by a Constitution of the Divine Hadrian.

​(222) Therefore, in accordance with this opinion, if the property
belonged to the deceased by quiritarian right, it can be recovered by
the legatee, whether he be an heir or a stranger; but if it only
belonged to the testator by bonitarian right, the legacy will be valid
under the Decree of the Senate even if left to a stranger, and must be
delivered by the heir under an order of court in an action for partition
of the estate. If, however, it did not belong to the testator by any
title, it would be valid under the Decree of the Senate, whether it was
left to the heir or to a stranger.

​(223) Where the same property is left, either jointly or severally, to
two or more legatees, each will be entitled to only proportionate
shares, whether they are heirs, in accordance with the opinion of our
preceptors, or whether they are strangers, in accordance with that of
authorities belonging to the other school.^[1]^

On the falcidian law.

​(224) Formerly, anyone was permitted to exhaust his entire estate by
legacies and the enfranchisement of slaves, thus leaving nothing to his
heir but an empty name; and the Law of the Twelve Tables, by which it is
provided that a person may dispose of his property absolutely by will,
seems to permit this to be done in the following words: "In whatever way
a man may bequeath his property it shall have legal effect"; and for
this reason, those who were appointed heirs rejected the inheritance and
therefore the majority of persons died intestate.

​(225) Hence the *Lex Furia* was enacted, by the terms of which (except
in the case of certain persons) it was not permitted to accept more than
a thousand asses either as a legacy or as a donation in anticipation of
death. This law, however, did not accomplish what was intended; for
example, anyone who had an estate of five thousand asses, could leave to
five men a thousand asses each, and, by doing so, exhaust the entire
estate.

​(226) In consequence of this, the *Lex Voconia* was subsequently
passed, by which it was provided that no one could, as a legatee,
*mortis causa*, take more than the heirs received. It is clear that by
this law the heirs appeared to receive a part of the estate, but it
still contained almost the same defect, for the testator could, in
distributing his estate among many legatees, manage to leave so little
to the heir that it

^[1]^ The ancient forms of legacies described above were greatly
modified by Nero and his successors, and were entirely abolished by
Justinian, who decreed that no distinction, in this respect, should
exist between bequests of every description. — ed.

would be of no advantage to him, for the sake of the profit, to assume
the burdens of the entire estate.

​(227) Then the *Lex Falcidia* was enacted, by which it was provided
that no more than three-fourths of an estate could be bequeathed; and
therefore it was necessary for the heir to have a fourth part of the
same, and this is the law at the present time.

​(228) The *Lex Fufia Caninia* also repressed inordinate license in the
bestowal of grants of freedom to slaves, as we have stated in the First
Commentary.

Concerning inoperative legacies.

​(229) A bequest made before the appointment of an heir is void, for the
reason that wills derive their force and effect from the appointment of
an heir, and on this account the appointment of the heir is considered
to be the beginning and foundation of the entire will.

​(230) A grant of freedom cannot be made before the appointment of an
heir, for the same reason.

​(231) Our preceptors do not think that a guardian can be appointed
under such circumstances, but Labeo and Proculus hold that a guardian
can be appointed, because by such an appointment nothing is taken from
the estate.

​(232) A bequest made after the death of an heir is void, that is to
say, if it is made as follows: "After my heir dies, I do give and
bequeath," or "Let my heir give"; the following provision, however, is
legal: "When my heir dies"; because it is not made after the death of
the heir, but will become operative at the last instant of his life.
Again, a bequest cannot be made as follows: "On the day before my heir
dies," as this is not considered to be founded on any good reason.

​(233) We understand that these rules also apply to the enfranchisement
of slaves.

​(234) Whether a guardian can be appointed after the death of an heir
may perhaps give rise to the same doubt which arose with reference to
his appointment before the institution of the heir.

​(235) Legacies bequeathed by way of penalty are void. A legacy is
considered to have been bequeathed by way of penalty, where it is left
for the purpose of compelling the heir either to perform some act, or to
refrain from doing so; as, for instance, where the bequest is made: "If
my heir gives his daughter in marriage to Titius let him pay ten
thousand sesterces to Seius"; or as follows: "If you do not give your
daughter in marriage to Titius, you shall pay him ten thousand
sesterces"; and again, for example, where the testator orders that if
his heir did not build him a monument within the term of two years he
should pay ten thousand sesterces to Titius, this bequest being by way
of penalty; and finally, in accordance with this definition, we can
suggest many similar cases of this kind.

​(236) Freedom cannot be granted by way of penal bequest, although a
question has arisen on this point.

​(237) We cannot, however, raise any dispute with reference to the
appointment of a guardian, because by such an appointment an heir cannot
be compelled either to perform some act, or to refrain from performing
it; and therefore, if a guardian is appointed by way of penalty, the
appointment will appear rather to have been made under a condition, than
by way of penalty.

​(238) A legacy left to an uncertain person is void. An uncertain person
is considered to be one of whom the testator has only an indistinct idea
in his mind; as for example, where a bequest is made in the following
terms: "Let my heir pay ten thousand sesterces to the first person who
comes to my funeral." The same rule of law applies if he makes a bequest
in general terms to all, as: "Whoever comes to my funeral"; or where the
bequest is left as follows: "Let my heir pay ten thousand sesterces to
whoever gives his daughter in marriage to my son." It also applies where
the bequest is in the following terms: "Whoever shall be the first
consuls nominated after the execution of my will," for all these
bequests are deemed to have been made to uncertain persons; and,
finally, many other instances of this kind might be adduced. The bequest
of a legacy is legal where the designation of the class to which the
person belongs is described with certainty, but the individual to whom
it is left is uncertain; as, for instance: "Let my heir pay ten thousand
sesterces to that one of my relatives now living who comes first to my
funeral."

​(239) A testamentary grant of freedom, however, cannot be made to an
uncertain person, because the *Lex Fufia Caninia* directs that slaves be
enfranchised by name.

​(240) A certain person must also be appointed a guardian.

​(241) A legacy bequeathed to a posthumous stranger is void. A
posthumous stranger is one, who, after his birth, will not be included
among the proper heirs of the testator; and therefore a grandson born to
an emancipated son is a posthumous stranger to his grandfather, and
likewise the unborn child of a woman who is not considered a wife at
Civil Law, is a posthumous stranger to his father.

​(242) A posthumous stranger cannot even be appointed an heir, for he is
an uncertain person.

​(243) What we stated above properly has reference to legacies, although
it was not unreasonably held by certain authorities that the appointment
of an heir by way of penalty could not be made; as it makes no
difference whether the heir is ordered to pay the legacy in case he
should either perform or not perform some act, or whether a co-heir is
appointed with him; for he is just as much compelled by the addition of
a co-heir as by the payment of a legacy either to do, or not to do
something contrary to his intention.

​(244) It is a question whether we can legally bequeath a legacy to one
who is in the power of him whom we have appointed the heir. Servius
thinks that the legacy can be legally bequeathed, but that it will lapse
if the legatee continues to be under control when the time arrives for
the legacy to vest; and therefore, whether the bequest is absolute, and
the party ceases to be under the control of the heir during the lifetime
of the testator, or whether it is left under a condition, and this takes
place before the condition is complied with; the legacy will be due.

Sabinus and Cassius think that a legacy can be legally bequeathed under
a condition, but not absolutely; for, although the legatee may cease to
be subject to the authority of the heir during the lifetime of the
testator, still, the legacy must be understood to be void; because it
would be considered as of no effect if the testator should die
immediately after making his will, but that it would be valid if he
should live longer would be absurd. The authorities of the other school,
however, are of the opinion that a legacy left under a condition is
inoperative, for the reason that we cannot be indebted any more
conditionally than absolutely to those whom we have under our control.

​(245) On the other hand, it is settled that if anyone under your
control is appointed an heir, he can be charged with the payment of a
legacy to you, but if you should become an heir through him the legacy
will be extinguished, because you cannot owe yourself a legacy. If,
however, your son should be emancipated, or your slave manumitted or
transferred to another party, and he himself should become the heir, or
make the other party his heir, the legacy will be due.

​(246) Let us now pass to the consideration of trusts.

​(247) And first let us examine trusts connected with estates.

​(248) In the first place, it should be ascertained that the heir has
been duly appointed according to law, and that he has been entrusted to
transfer the estate to another; as otherwise, a will is void by which no
one has legally been appointed an heir.

​(249) The proper forms of words creating a trust, and employed are: "I
beg, I ask, I wish, I entrust"; and these are just as binding when used
separately as when they are united in a single phrase.

​(250) Therefore, when we have written: "Let Lucius Titius be my heir,"
we can add: "I ask you, Lucius Titius, and I beg you, that as soon as
you can enter on my estate you deliver and transfer it to Gaius Seius";
and we can also ask him to transfer a part of the same. It is likewise
permitted to leave the trust under a condition, or absolutely, or after
a certain day.

​(251) After the estate has been transferred, he who transferred it
will, nevertheless, continue to be the heir; and he who received the
estate sometimes occupies the position of an heir, and sometimes that of
a legatee.

​(252) Formerly, however, he did not occupy the position of either heir
or legatee, but rather that of a purchaser; for in those days it was
customary for the party to whom the estate was transferred to give a
coin as an evidence of the purchase of the same; and the stipulations
usually entered into between the vendor and the purchaser of an estate
were accustomed to take place between the heir and the party to whom the
estate was conveyed, that is to say, as follows: The heir stipulated
with the party to whom the estate was transferred that he would be
indemnified for anything which he might be compelled to pay on account
of the estate, or might otherwise pay in good faith; and if anyone were
to bring an action against him on account of the estate, that it would
be properly defended; and, on the other hand, the party who received the
estate stipulated that if anything should come into the hands of the
heir which belonged to the estate it should be delivered to him, and
also that he should be permitted, either as the agent or attorney of the
heir, to bring any actions which the latter was entitled to bring in his
own name.

​(253) In subsequent times, however, during the Consulate of Trebellius
Maximus and Annseus Seneca, a decree of the Senate was enacted, by which
it was provided that where an estate was transferred under a trust, the
actions to which the heir was entitled, and also those which could be
brought against him under the Civil Law, should be granted for and
against the beneficiary of the trust. Under this Decree of the Senate,
the judicial securities formerly in use were abandoned, and the Prætor
was accustomed to grant equitable actions both in favor of, and against
the party who received the estate as heir, and these are set forth in
the Edict.

​(254) But again, for the reason that the appointed heirs when requested
to transfer either all the estate, or nearly all of it, refused to
accept it on account of the little or no advantage received, and hence
the trusts were extinguished, it was afterwards decreed by the Senate
during the Consulate of Pegasus and Pusio, that the heir who was
requested to transfer an estate should be permitted to retain a fourth
part of the same, just as he is permitted to do under the *Lex
Falcidia*, in the case of legacies; and the same permission was granted
where separate things were left under the terms of a trust. By the
provisions of this Decree of the Senate, the heir himself sustains all
the burdens of the estate, and he who receives the remainder of the
estate as the beneficiary of the trust, occupies the position of a
partial legatee; that is to say, of one to whom a portion of the
property has been left; which species of legacy is called partition,
because the legatee divides the estate with the heir. Hence, the result
is that the stipulations usually entered into by the heir and the
partial legatee also take place between the person who receives the
estate as the beneficiary of the trust, and the heir; that is to say,
that the profit and loss arising from the estate shall be divided among
them *pro rata*.

​(255) Therefore, if the appointed heir is asked to transfer no more
than three-fourths of the estate, it will then be transferred under the
Trebellian Decree of the Senate, and rights of action will be granted
*pro rata* on both sides against the heir under the Civil Law, and
against the beneficiary of the trust under the Decree of the Senate;
for, although the heir continues to be such even with reference to that
part of the estate which he has transferred, and actions for the entire
indebtedness of the estate can be brought against him; still, he cannot
be made liable for anything more, nor can actions be granted against him
for any further claims beyond the amount of interest which he has in the
estate.

​(256) If anyone is requested to transfer more than three-fourths of the
estate, or all of it, there is ground for the application of the
Pegasian Decree of the Senate.

​(257) When, however, the heir has once entered upon the estate,
provided he does so voluntarily — whether he retains a fourth of the
same, or refuses to do so — he will be liable to the entire indebtedness
of the estate; but if he retains a fourth, stipulations should be
entered into between the partial legatee and the heir with reference to
their respective shares; but if he transfers the entire estate, a
stipulation should be entered into just as if the estate had been
purchased and sold.

​(258) But where the appointed heir refuses to enter on an estate for
the reason that he says that he suspects it of being insolvent, it is
provided by the Pegasian Decree of the Senate that, on the request of
the party to whom he is asked to transfer it he may be compelled to
accept and convey it, by order of the Prætor, and actions shall be
granted both for and against him who received the estate as beneficiary
of the trust, just as under the Trebellian Decree of the Senate. In this
instance, no stipulations are required, because at the same time
security is given to the party who transferred the estate, and rights of
action with reference to the estate are transferred for and against the
party who obtained it as beneficiary.

​(259) It makes no difference, however, whether anyone who is appointed
heir to the entire estate is asked to transfer all, or a portion of the
same; or whether he who was appointed heir to a share is asked to
transfer the entire share, or only a portion of it, for, in this
instance also, the rule of the Pegasian Decree of the Senate is
understood to apply to the fourth part of the share.

​(260) Anyone can also leave single articles under a trust, as for
instance, a tract of land, a slave, a garment, silver plate, money; and
he may either charge the heir himself, or a legatee to deliver it,
although a legatee cannot be charged with a legacy.

​(261) Likewise, not only the property of the testator can be left under
the terms of a trust, but also that of an heir, a legatee, or any other
person whomsoever. Hence, a legatee may not only be charged to deliver
the legacy bequeathed to him to another, but he may also be charged with
the delivery of anything else belonging either to himself or to another;
only it must be observed that no one can be asked to deliver to others
more than he himself received under the will, for any bequest in excess
of this would be void.

​(262) Moreover, when property belonging to another is left under the
terms of a trust, it is necessary for the party who is asked to deliver
it either to purchase and transfer the said property, or to pay its
value; just as in the case where property belonging to another is
bequeathed by condemnation. Still, there are some authorities who hold
that if the owner refuses to sell property left under the terms of a
trust, the trust will be extinguished; though the rule is different
where a legacy is bequeathed by condemnation.

​(263) Freedom can also be conferred upon a slave under the terms of a
trust, and either the heir or the legatee may be charged to manumit him.

​(264) Nor does it make any difference whether the testator makes the
request with reference to one of his own slaves, or to one belonging to
the heir himself, or to the legatee, or even to a stranger.

​(265) Therefore, a slave belonging to another must be purchased and
manumitted; but if his owner is unwilling to sell him, the grant of
freedom is extinguished; because in this instance no computation of
value can be made.

​(266) When a slave is manumitted under the terms of a trust, he does
not become the freedman of the testator, even though he may have been
his slave, but of the person who manumitted him.

​(267) Where a slave is ordered to be free by a direct provision of a
will, for instance, as follows: "Let my slave Stichus be free," or "I
order my slave Stichus to be free," he becomes the freedman of the
testator himself. No other slave can obtain his freedom by a direct
provision of the will but one who belonged to the testator by
quiritarian right at both times, that is to say, the time when he
executed the will, and when he died.

​(268) A great difference exists between bequests made under the terms
of a trust and those left directly.

​(269) Hence a bequest may be left under a trust, to be discharged by
the heir of the heir, while a bequest of this kind made in any other way
in the beginning of a will is inoperative.

​(270) Likewise, a person about to die intestate can charge his heir to
deliver his estate to a third party under the terms of a trust, but on
the other hand, he cannot charge him with the payment of a legacy.

(270a) Moreover, a legacy left by a codicil is not valid unless it has
been confirmed by the testator, that is, unless the testator provided in
his will that whatever he might insert in a codicil would be ratified; a
trust, however, may be left without any confirmation of a codicil.

​(271) Again, a legatee cannot be charged with a legacy, but the
beneficiary of a trust can himself be charged with the execution of a
trust in favor of another.

​(272) Likewise, freedom cannot be left directly to a slave belonging to
another, but this can be done under the terms of a trust.

​(273) No one can be appointed an heir or disinherited by a codicil,
even though it may have been confirmed by the will; but the testamentary
heir may be asked by a codicil to transfer the estate either wholly or
in part, to another, although the codicil may not have been confirmed by
the will.

​(274) Moreover, a woman appointed an heir by anyone who is registered
in the census as possessing a hundred thousand sesterces, cannot take
under the *Lex Voconia*; but she can still receive an estate left to her
under a trust.

​(275) Latins who are forbidden by the *Lex Junia* to receive estates or
legacies directly under a will, can do so under the terms of a trust.

​(276) Moreover, while the slave of a testator under the age of thirty
years is prohibited by a decree of the Senate from being appointed an
heir, and declared free; still, it is held by many authorities that we
can direct him to become free when he reaches the age of thirty years,
and that then the estate may be transferred to him.

​(277) In like manner, although we cannot, after the death of a person
who was our heir, appoint another in his stead, still, we can request
him to transfer the entire estate, or a portion of the same, to another
party when he dies; and for the reason that a trust may be created to
take effect after the death of an heir, we may bring about the same
result by inserting in the will: "When my heir Titius is dead, I desire
my estate to belong to Publius Mævius"; and, whichever method is
employed, Titius will leave his heir bound to transfer the estate under
the terms of the trust.

​(278) Moreover, we can sue for legacies under the Formulary System, but
we enforce the performance of trusts, at Rome, either before the Consul
or the Prætor, who is especially charged by the law with this duty; in
the provinces, however, it is done by the Governor.

​(279) Again, legal questions arising from trusts are decided in the
City of Rome at all times, but those having reference to legacies only
during the regular sessions of the tribunals.

​(280) The interest and profits of property left in trust are payable,
provided the party charged with the trust is in default, but the
interest of legacies is not payable; and this is stated in a rescript of
the Divine Hadrian. I am aware, however, that it was held by Julianus
that, where a legacy was left under the form of permission, the same
rule applies as in the case of trusts, and this opinion is the one
accepted at the present time.

​(281) Legacies bequeathed in the Greek language are not valid; trusts
bequeathed in this way are valid.

​(282) Moreover, where an heir disputes a legacy left by way of
condemnation, an action can be brought against him for double the amount
of the claim; but he can only be sued for simple damages where he acts
as trustee.

​(283) Likewise, where anyone, through mistake, pays more than was due
under the terms of a trust, he can recover the excess; but where, in the
case of a legacy by condemnation, payment is made for more than was due,
through mistake, the excess cannot be recovered. The same rule of law
applies where nothing at all was due, and through some mistake or other,
payment has been made.

​(284) There were formerly other differences which at present no longer
exist.

​(285) For instance, aliens could take as beneficiaries of a trust, and
which was, generally speaking, the original cause of trusts, but this
was subsequently prohibited, and now a Decree of the Senate, enacted at
the instance of the Divine Hadrian, provides that trusts left for the
benefit of aliens shall be claimed by the Treasury.

​(286) Persons who are unmarried are, by the *Lex Julia*, relating to
wills, prohibited from receiving estates and legacies, and formerly were
considered capable of being the beneficiaries of a trust.

(286a) Likewise, persons who have no children, and who for this reason
under the terms of the *Lex Papia* lose half of their estates and
legacies, were formerly considered capable of receiving the full benefit
of trusts. Afterwards, however, they were forbidden by the Pegasian
Decree of the Senate to enjoy the benefit of trusts, just as in the case
of legacies and estates; and the property passed to those named in the
will who have children, and, if none of them have any, to the people; as
in the law with reference to legacies and estates which, for this or a
similar reason, are deemed to have no owners.

​(287) Again, in former times, property could be left under the terms of
a trust to an uncertain person, or to a posthumous stranger, although he
could neither be appointed an heir nor a legatee; but, by a Decree of
the Senate, enacted at the instance of the Divine Hadrian, the same rule
which applied to legacies and estates was adopted with reference to
trusts.

​(288) Likewise, there is no doubt that property cannot be left under a
trust by way of penalty.

​(289) Although in many branches of the law a much broader application
to trusts exists than in the case of direct bequests, in other respects
they are equally valid; still, a guardian cannot be appointed by will
unless this is done directly, for instance, as follows: "Let Titius be
the guardian of my child"; or "I appoint Titius guardian of my
children"; but he cannot be appointed under a trust.

* * * * *
