THE ENACTMENTS OF JUSTINIAN. BOOK II.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE DIVISION OF THINGS.

We explained the rights of persons in the preceding Book, now let us
consider things; which are either included in our patrimonial estate or
are outside of it. Some things are by natural law common to all persons,
some are public, some belong to a corporate body, some to no one, the
greater part are the property of individuals, and these are acquired in
various ways as will appear hereafter.

\(1) By natural law the following things belong to all men, namely: air,
running water, the sea, and for this reason the shores of the sea. No
one, therefore, is prohibited from approaching the seashore if he avoids
damaging houses, monuments, and other structures, because they are not,
like the sea, subject to the Law of Nations.

\(2) All rivers and ports are also public, and therefore the right of
fishing in a harbor or in streams is common to all.

\(3) The shore of the sea extends to the point attained by the highest
tide in winter.

\(4) The public use of the banks of rivers is also subject to the Law of
Nations, just as the use of the river itself is; and hence anyone has a
right to secure a vessel to them, to fasten ropes to trees growing
there, or to deposit any cargo thereon, just as he has to navigate the
river itself; but the ownership of the same is in those whose lands are
adjacent, and therefore the trees growing there belong to them.

\(5) The public use of the sea-shore is also subject to the Law of
Nations in like manner as that of the sea itself, and therefore any
person has as good a right to build a house there in which he can take
refuge, as he has to dry his nets or to draw them out of the sea. The
ownership of the shores, must, however, be considered as belonging to no
one, but to be subject to the same law as the sea itself and the earth
or sand underneath it.

\(6) Such property as theatres, race-courses, and other things of this
kind which are situated in towns, as well as such as are the common
property of cities, belong to corporate bodies and not to individuals.

\(7) Moreover, things which are sacred, religious, and holy, belong to
no one, for that which is subject to Divine Law is not the property of
any person.

\(8) Those things are sacred which have been formally consecrated to God
by the Pontiffs, for example, sacred edifices, and donations regularly
dedicated to the service of God, which We have also by one of Our
Constitutions prohibited from being alienated or encumbered except for
the purpose of redeeming captives. Where, however, anyone by his own
authority makes anything as it were sacred, so far as his efforts are
concerned, it is not sacred, but profane. The ground on which a sacred
edifice has been constructed still continues sacred after the edifice
has been demolished, which was also the view of Papinian.

\(9) Any person voluntarily renders a place religious when he buries a
corpse on his own land. He is not permitted, however, to bury it on land
which is held in common and still is pure, without the consent of the
other owner; but he may make the interment in a tomb which is owned in
common, even though the other owner does not consent. Again, where the
usufruct belongs to someone else, it has been decided that if the
usufructuary does not consent the owner cannot make the place religious.
It is lawful to make an interment upon land belonging to another if the
latter grants permission to do so, and the place becomes religious even
if the owner did not ratify the act until after the corpse was buried
there.

\(10) Such things are city walls and gates are also holy, and being to
some extent subject to Divine Law, are, for that reason, not included in
the property of anyone. We mention walls as holy, because

the punishment of death has been fixed against those who commit any
injury to them; and for this reason We designate as "sanctions" those
parts of laws in which We establish penalties to be imposed upon such as
are guilty of violation of the laws.

\(11) Things become the property of individuals in many ways, for by
natural law we obtain the ownership of certain things which, as We have
already stated, is called the Law of Nations, and we obtain the
ownership of others by the Civil Law. It is more convenient, therefore,
to begin with the more ancient law; for it is evident that natural law
is the older because in the course of nature it originated at the same
time with the human race; and civil laws only came into existence when
states were founded, magistrates appointed, and laws committed to
writing for the first time.

\(12) Therefore, wild beasts, birds, and fishes, that is to say all
creatures that exist on the earth, in the sea, or in the air, as soon as
they are taken by anyone immediately become his property by the Law of
Nations, since whatever formerly belonged to no one is conceded by
natural reason to the first person obtaining possession of the same.^1^
Nor does it make any difference whether anyone takes wild beasts and
birds on his own ground or on that of another, although it is evident
that if anyone enters upon the land of another for the purpose of
hunting animals or birds, he may be prohibited from entering by the
owner, if he is aware of it. Any of these things which you may have
taken is understood to be your property as long as it is retained in
your custody; but after it has escaped from your custody and recovered
its natural liberty, it ceases to be yours, and belongs to the first
person who secures it. It is understood to have recovered its natural
liberty when it has escaped out of your sight, or, if still in your
sight, its pursuit is difficult.

\(13) The question has arisen as to whether when a wild animal which has
been wounded so severely that it can be taken immediately, it becomes
your property; and it has been declared by some that this is the case,
and that it is to be considered yours as long as you follow it; but that
if you desist from following it, it ceases to be yours, and becomes the
property of the first occupant. Others hold that it is not yours until
you have actually seized it, and We confirm the last opinion because
many things may occur to prevent you from seizing it.

\(14) Bees are also wild by nature. Therefore, if they settle upon your
tree, they are not understood to be your property until you have
enclosed them in a hive, any more than birds which have made a nest in
your tree; and for this reason if anyone else shuts them up in a hive he
will become their owner, and anyone else can remove their honeycombs if
they have made any. It is certain that if you see a person entering upon
your land before anything has been touched, you have a legal right to
forbid him to enter. A swarm of bees which has escaped from your hive is
understood to be yours as long as you can see it and the pursuit of the
same is not difficult; otherwise, it becomes the property of the first
occupant.

^1^ "*Res nullius cedit occupanti.*" Â— ED.

\(15) The nature of peacocks and pigeons is also wild, and it does not
matter if they have the habit of flying away and returning, for bees act
in the same way, and it is established that their nature is wild; and
certain persons have so far tamed deer that they are accustomed to go
into the woods and return, and no one denies that they are wild by
nature. However, with reference to animals which are accustomed to go
away and return, the rule has been established that they are considered
yours as long as they intend returning; but if they cease to have that
intention, they likewise cease to be yours, and belong to the first
person who secures them; and they are deemed to have lost the intention
to return when they abandon the habit of doing so.

\(16) Chickens and geese are not of a wild nature, and this we may
ascertain from the fact that there are other fowls which we call wild,
and also other geese to which we give this appellation. Therefore, if
your geese or chickens are frightened for any reason and fly away, they
are still regarded as yours, wherever they may be, even though they may
have fled beyond your sight; and anyone who retains possession of these
animals for the purpose of gain is deemed to have committed theft.

\(17) Whatever We take from the enemy immediately becomes ours by the
Law of Nations; to such an extent, indeed, that even freemen are reduced
to slavery for our benefit, although, nevertheless, if they escape from
our control, and return to their own people, they regain their former
condition.

\(18) Again, stones, gems, and other things found upon the shore of the
sea immediately become the property of the finder by natural law.

\(19) In like manner, the increase of animals under your control is by
the same law acquired by you.

\(20) Moreover, whatever a river adds to your land by alluvial soil
belongs to you under the Law of Nations, for this deposit is an
indiscernible increase; and that which is added in this manner is held
to have been added so gradually that you cannot ascertain how much is
added at any moment of time.

\(21) But if the force of the river removes any portion of your field
and conveys it to that of your neighbor, it is evident that it still
remains yours; although it is clear that if it continues joined for a
long time to the land of your neighbor, and the trees carried away with
it have fastened their roots in his soil, from that time forth they are
considered as belonging to the land of your neighbor.

\(22) When an island arises in the sea, which rarely happens, it becomes
the property of the first person who occupies it, for before that it is
considered as belonging to no one. But when an island arises in a river,
which often occurs, if it be situated in the middle of the stream it is
the common property of those who own land on the bank on either side of
the river, in proportion to the extent of the land of each one measured
along the bank. But if it is nearer to one side than it is to the other,
it is the property of those alone who own land on that side near the
bank.

Where, however, the river is divided in a certain place, and then
farther down the divisions reunite, and thus turn a man's property into
an island, the land still belongs to the party who formerly owned it.

\(23) Moreover, if the stream, having left its natural bed, commences to
flow elsewhere, the original channel belongs to those persons who hold
land near the bank, manifestly in proportion to the extent of the
property of each one as measured along the said bank; and the new
channel begins to be of the same nature as the stream itself, that is to
say public. If, however, the stream returns after a time to its original
bed, the new channel at once begins to belong to those who own land
along its bank.

\(24) The case is otherwise, however, where anyone's land is entirely
inundated, for a flood does not change the nature of the land; and, on
this account, when the water recedes, it is evident that the land
belongs to the party who originally owned it.

\(25) When anyone has changed the form of property belonging to another,
it is customary to make the inquiry which of them is the owner of the
same according to natural reason, whether it is he who made the article,
or he who was formerly the owner of the material; as for instance, when
anyone has made wine, oil, or grain out of the grapes, olives, or ears
of another; or has made a vessel out of the gold, silver, or copper of
another; or has made mead by mixing wine and honey which belonged to
another; or has made a plaster or an eyewash out of drugs belonging to
another; or a garment out of his wool; or a ship, a chest, or a bench
out of boards belonging to another person. After many disputes between
the Sabinians and Proculians, an intermediate opinion was adopted, to
the effect that if the new article could be restored to its original
materials, he should be regarded as the owner to whom the same formerly
belonged; but if it could not be restored, the party who made the
article should be considered its owner; for example, a vessel which has
been cast can be restored to the rough mass of copper, silver, or gold,
but neither wine, oil, nor grain can be reconverted into grapes, olives,
or ears, nor can mead be resolved into wine and honey.

Where, however, anyone has made an article partly out of materials
belonging to himself and partly out of those belonging to another; for
example, mead out of his own wine and someone else's honey; or a plaster
or eye-wash out of drugs belonging to both himself and others; or a
garment out of wool belonging to himself and another; there is no doubt
that the article in this case belongs to the party who made it, for he
not only bestowed his labor but also furnished a portion of the
materials.

\(26) Where, however, anyone has interwoven purple thread belonging to
another person into a garment of his own, the thread, though more
precious, is added to the garment by way of accession, and the party who
was the owner of the thread can bring an action of theft, as well as one
to recover the value of the property, against him who purloined it,
whether he himself, or someone else made the garment; but although
property which has been destroyed cannot be re-

covered by a suit, still an action can be brought for it against thieves
and any other parties in possession.

\(27) If materials belonging to two persons are mingled together with
the consent of the owners, the entire mass formed by the said mingling
is the common property of both; as, where they mix their wine, or melt
together masses of silver or gold Â— even if the materials are not
similar Â— and for this reason a peculiar kind of substance is created,
as, for instance, mead from wine and honey, or electrum from gold and
silver, the same rule applies; for in this instance also there is no
doubt that the newly formed substance is common property. Again, if the
articles are mixed by accident, without the consent of the owners,
whether the materials are different or identical the same rule applies.

\(28) If, then, the grain of Titius should be mixed with yours, and this
be done with his consent and yours, the grain will be common property;
because the individual portions, that is to say the single grains, which
belong to each of you have been rendered common property by your
consent. Where, however, the mixture took place accidentally, or if
Titius made it without your permission, the grain is not considered to
be common property because the individual parts exist in their own
substance; and, under such circumstances, the grain no more becomes
common property than a herd would be considered common if the cattle of
Titius should become mixed with yours. If, however, all the grain is
kept by either of you, an action for recovery can be brought by the
other for his portion of the same; although it is in the discretion of
the judge to make an estimate of the value of the grain which belongs to
each.

\(29) When anyone erects a building with another party's materials upon
his own ground, he is understood to be the owner of what he has built,
because all structures belong to the soil. Still, the former owner of
the materials does not for this reason cease to be their owner, but for
a certain time he cannot bring suit to recover their value or for their
production, on account of a law of the Twelve Tables by which it is
provided that no one can be compelled to remove the materials of another
which have been used in his own building, but must pay him double the
value of the same, by means of the action designated *de tigno
injuncto;* (and under the term "*Tignum*" is included all kinds of
materials of which edifices are constructed). This rule has been adopted
to avoid the necessity of demolishing buildings; but if for any reason
the building should be destroyed, the owner of the materials, provided
he has not already obtained double their value, can then bring suit for
recovery, and to require the production of the same.

\(30) On the other hand, where anyone builds a house with his own
materials on the land of another, the house becomes the property of the
party owning the land. In this instance, however, the owner of the
materials loses his property, because it is understood that he
voluntarily alienated them and he does so, at all events, if he was not
ignorant that he was building the house on another's land; and,
therefore, even though the house should be destroyed, he cannot bring
suit

for the materials. It is well established, however, that if the party
who built the house has obtained entire possession, and the owner of the
land claims the house as belonging to him, and refuses to pay the value
of the materials and the wages of the workman, he can be barred on the
ground of fraud, that is, if the party in possession who built the house
acted in good faith; for if he knew that the land belonged to someone
else, he can be considered to blame because he rashly built on ground
which he was aware was the property of another.

\(31) If Titius sets a plant belonging to another in his own soil, it
will belong to him; and, on the other hand, if Titius sets his own plant
in the soil of MÃ¦vius, the plant will belong to MÃ¦vius, if in either
case it has taken root, but before it does so it is the property of its
former owner. Moreover, from the time that a plant takes root ownership
in it is changed to such an extent that if even the tree of a neighbor
encroaches upon the land of Titius so that it throws out roots therein,
We hold that the tree is the property of Titius, for reason does not
admit that a tree should belong to anyone else than to him in whose soil
it has taken root; and therefore if a tree planted near a boundary line
extends its roots into the soil of a neighbor, it becomes the common
property of both parties.

\(32) Under the same rule, according to which plants growing on land are
attached to the soil, grain after it is sown is also understood to
belong to the soil. But just as he who builds upon the land of another
has, as We have stated, the right to protect himself by an exception on
the ground of fraud, if the owner of the land demands the building of
him; so likewise, can a man protect himself by means of the same
exception after he has in good faith sowed grain at his own expense upon
the land of another.

\(33) Writing, also, even though it be of gold, belongs as much to
papyrus and parchment as edifices or crops do to the soil; and,
therefore, if Titius has written a poem, a history, or a speech, upon
your papyrus or parchment, you, and not Titius, are considered to be its
owner. But if you demand your books or parchments from Titius, and are
not ready to pay the expense of the writing, Titius can defend himself
by the exception on the ground of fraud; at all events, he can do so if
he obtained possession of the said papyrus or parchments in good faith.

\(34) Where anyone has painted a picture upon the tablet of another,
some persons think that the tablet should belong to the picture; and
others are of the opinion that the picture, no matter what kind it may
be, is a part of the tablet. It appears to Us preferable that the tablet
should belong to the picture, for it is ridiculous that a painting by
Apelles or Parrhasius should be considered an addition to a wretched
tablet. Wherefore, if the owner of the tablet be in possession of the
painting, and the artist who painted it demands it, but is unwilling to
pay the value of the tablet he can be barred on the ground of fraud; but
if he who painted the picture is in possession of the same, it follows
that an action can be brought against him by the owner of the tablet; in
which instance if he does not pay the expense of the

painting, he can be barred by the exception on the ground of fraud, at
all events if he who painted the picture obtained possession of it in
good faith; for it is evident that if the artist or anyone else acquired
the tablet surreptitiously, the owner of the same is entitled to an
action of theft.

\(35) If any person in good faith purchases real property from someone
who is not the owner of the same, but whom he thought to be such, or
receives it as a gift or in any other way in good faith, it is founded
on natural reason that any crops which he has gathered shall belong to
him, on account of his cultivation and care; and therefore, if the owner
of the property afterwards appears and claims it, he cannot bring suit
for the crops which have been consumed by the former. The same
indulgence is however not conceded to a party who knowingly kept
possession of the land of another; and therefore he is obliged to
account for the crops along with the land, even though they may have
been consumed.

\(36) He to whom the usufruct of land belongs is not entitled to the
crops unless he himself has gathered them; and therefore, although they
may be ripe, if he dies before they are gathered they do not belong to
his heir, but are acquired by the owner of the property, and the same
rule, generally speaking, applies to serfs.

\(37) The young of cattle is also classed as their fruit, just as their
milk, hair, and wool are; and therefore lambs, pigs, calves, and colts
immediately, by natural law, become the property of the usufructuary.
The offspring of a female slave is, however, not fruit, and hence
belongs to the owner of the property, for it seems absurd that a man
should be classed as fruit, when nature has provided the fruits of all
things for the benefit of the human race.

\(38) Where any person has the usufruct of a flock, he is required,
according to the opinion of Julianus, to replace from the young any of
the original flock that die, and is also required to replace any dead
vines or trees which may have died; for it is his duty as the good head
of a household to cultivate the land in a proper manner.

\(39) The Divine Hadrian, in compliance with the principles of natural
justice, conceded to the finder any treasure which he found on his own
land; and established the same rule where anyone accidentally discovered
treasure in a sacred or religious place. But where anyone found treasure
on the land of another, not devoting himself to that purpose, but by
accident, he conceded half of it to the owner of the land; and, in
accordance with the same principle, where anyone found something on the
land of the Emperor, he decreed that half of it should belong to whoever
found it, and the other half to the Emperor. Agreeably to this rule, if
anyone finds treasure on land belonging to the Treasury, or in a public
place, half of it belongs to him and half to the Treasury, or the
city.^1^

^1^ According to Bracton, who calls it "*Vetus depositio pecuniÃ¦, vel
alterius metallÃ¦, cujus non extat modo memoria, ut iam dominium non
habeat*" (III, III, 3), treasure-trove originally belonged to the person
who found it. This, however, was not the rule in ancient India. "Of old
hoards, and precious minerals in the

\(40) Things are likewise obtained by us by natural law through
delivery; for nothing more accords with natural justice than to confirm
the desire of an owner to transfer his property to another. And,
therefore, corporeal property, of every description whatever can be
transferred, and as soon as delivery has been made by the owner of the
same it is alienated. For this reason stipendiary and tributary lands
are alienated in this manner. Lands situated in the provinces are
designated stipendiary and tributary, but among these and Italian lands
according to Our Constitution no difference at present exists.

\(41) Thus, if anything is bestowed by way of gift or dowry, or for any
other reason, it is unquestionably transferred; nevertheless, things
sold and delivered are not acquired by the purchaser unless he has

earth, the king is entitled to half by reason of his general protection,
and because he is the lord paramount of the soil." (Sir Wm. Jones, Laws
of Menu, Page 280.)

In England from very early times treasure-trove has been an unquestioned
perquisite of the Crown. It was essential that the article should have
been concealed in the earth. The first laws on this subject were
promulgated during the reign of Edward the Confessor, and provided that
treasure found anywhere but on the premises of the Church should be
absolutely the property of the King; if found in churches or cemeteries,
all the gold discovered belonged to the King, as well as half the
silver. "*Thesauri de terra regis sunt, nisi in ecclesia aut in
cimiterio inveniantur. Et si ibi inveniantur, aurum est regis; et si
argentum dimidium est regis et dimidium eeclesiÃ¦ ubi inventum fuerit;
quecumique sit, dives vel pauper.*"

Moreover, if any one found an animal or any other property without an
owner, he was compelled to bring it to the nearest town and summon the
secular and religious authorities, who made proclamation in the
surrounding villages in order to ascertain, if possible, to whom it
belonged, before its appropriation by the lord. (Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England; *Leges Regis Edwardi Confessoris* XIV, XXIV.)
Death or mutilation was the penalty formerly inflicted for the
concealment of treasure trove. (Glanvil I, 2.) The offence is now a
misdemeanor and is punishable by fine and imprisonment. (Stephen, A
Digest of the Criminal Law, Art. 342.)

The Jewish law was entirely founded on the abandonment of the property
in Question, and if the person who lost it had renounced all hope of
recovering it, or no owner could be heard of, the title vested in the
first occupant. (Mishna, Chap. II.) In the United States,
treasure-trove, generally speaking, belongs to the finder. The Louisiana
law provides that it shall belong to the owner of the land, if found by
him; if discovered by another, half shall be his, and half the owner's.
(Civ. Cod. of Louisiana, Art. 336.) This is also the rule in Prance,
Spain, and Italy. In Portugal, where there is evidence that the treasure
has been hidden for more than thirty years, it belongs to the owner of
the land; if found by another the latter is entitled to one third of it.
(Cod. *Civ. PortuguÃªz*, Art. 424.) Sweden requires notice to be
published, and if this is not done the finder must, by way of penalty,
pay double the value of the article found. *(Sveriges Rikes Lag;
Strafflag, Kap*. XXII, 19.) Austrian law confiscates to the State one
third of any treasure found, and divides the remainder equally between
the finder and the owner of the soil. *(Allegemeines BÃ¼rgerliches
Gesetzbuch*, Art. 399.) The same rule prevails in Germany.
*(BÃ¼rgerliches Gesetzbuch*, Sec. 984.) In Japan, the right of ownership
vests in the finder after public notice for six months has been given;
but if the object was discovered on the premises of another, ownership
is equally acquired by both parties. (Civ. Cod. of Japan, Art. 241.) By
Mohammedan law, the nature of the property, to some extent, governs its
final disposition. If it consists of Moslem coins, it is considered as a
trust for the benefit of the owner, and the finder must treat it as
such; if the coins are foreign, one fifth is due to the State, as is the
case of booty taken in war, and the other four fifths may be retained by
the person who recovered it. (The Hedaya, I, I, 5.)

paid the price to the vendor, or made him secure in some way, for
example, by giving him a surety or pledge. This regulation was provided
by a Law of the Twelve Tables, and also may properly be said to have
been derived from the Law of Nations, that is, natural law. If the party
who sold the article trusted the purchaser, it must be held that the
subject of the sale at once becomes the property of the latter.

\(42) It makes no difference whether the owner of the property himself
delivers it to another, or someone else does this with his consent.

\(43) For this reason when the free control of the entire property has
been entrusted by the owner to another party, and the latter sells or
delivers a portion of it, he makes the person receiving it the owner of
the same.

\(44) Sometimes even the bare desire of the owner, without delivery, is
sufficient to transfer the title to the property; for example, if anyone
sells or presents you with anything which he has already lent or hired
to, or deposited with you; as, even if he did not deliver it to you for
that purpose, nevertheless, by the very fact that he allowed it to
become yours, the ownership of the same is acquired by you, just as if
it had been delivered with that very intention.

\(45) Again, if anyone sells merchandise stored in a warehouse, he
delivers the property in the said merchandise to the purchaser at the
same time that he delivers him the keys of the warehouse.

\(46) In like manner, sometimes the intention of the owner, when
manifested towards an uncertain person, transfers ownership in an
article; as, for example when PrÃ¦tors and Consuls who throw presents
into a crowd are ignorant what each individual will obtain, and still,
for the reason they wish that what each one secures shall belong to him,
they at once render him the owner of the same.

\(47) For this reason it seems to be right that anyone who takes
possession of property which has been abandoned by its owner immediately
acquires the title to it; and that is considered to be abandoned which
the owner has designedly cast aside with the intention that it shall no
longer be included among his possessions, and therefore has immediately
ceased to be its owner.

\(48) The case is different where articles are thrown overboard during a
storm at sea for the purpose of lightening the vessel; as these remain
the property of the owner, because it is evident that they are not
thrown overboard with the idea that the owner no longer wishes to have
them, but that he and the vessel may the more readily escape the danger
of the sea; for which reason, if anyone takes them away with the
expectation of profiting by them, whether they have been cast on shore
by the waves, or he has obtained them in the sea itself, he commits
theft. Such things do not greatly differ from those which fall from a
moving carriage without the knowledge of their owners.

TITLE II. CONCERNING INCORPOREAL PROPERTY.

Again, some property is corporeal, and some incorporeal.

\(1) Corporeal property is such as by its nature is tangible; as, for
instance, land, a slave, clothing, gold, silver, and in short,
innumerable other things.

\(2) Incorporeal property is that which cannot be touched, and is such
as consists of rights; for instance, an inheritance, an usufruct, or
obligations contracted in any way. Neither is it necessary that
corporeal property should be included in an estate, for the crops
gathered from land are corporeal, and what is due to us by reason of any
obligation is ordinarily corporeal, for example, land, a slave, or
money; while the right of inheritance itself, the right to make use of
the crops, as well as the right of the obligation are incorporeal.

\(3) To the same class belong rights attaching to urban and rustic
estates, which are also called servitudes.

TITLE III. CONCERNING SERVITUDES.

The rights attaching to rustic estates are the following, namely: those
of passage, driving, of way, and of conducting water. Passage is the
right to walk, but not to drive a beast of burden or a vehicle; driving
is the right to conduct either a beast of burden or a vehicle; therefore
he who has the right of passage does not possess that of driving; while
he who has the right to drive has also the right of passage and can make
use of it even without a beast of burden. The right of way is the right
of going and either driving or walking; for it includes both of the
former rights. The right of conducting water is that of bringing water
through the land of another.

\(1) Servitudes attaching to urban estates are those belonging to
buildings and estates are styled "urban" because we call all buildings
"urban", even though they are built in the country. The servitudes of
urban estates are the following: that a neighbor shall sustain the
weight of his neighbor's house; that he can place a beam in the wall of
his neighbor; that he shall either permit, or not permit water to drop
or flow into his house, his courtyard or his drain; and that no one
shall raise his house to such a height as to obstruct the lights of his
neighbor.

\(2) Some persons think that the right of drawing water, driving cattle
to water, pasture, burning lime, and digging sand, are justly included
among the servitudes of rustic estates.

\(3) These are designated servitudes of estates because without the
latter they cannot exist, for no one can acquire a servitude over an
urban or rustic estate unless he himself has an estate; nor can anyone
who does not possess an estate owe a servitude of this description.

\(4) When anyone wishes to establish some right for the benefit of his
neighbor he should do so by means of contracts and stipulations. Anyone
may also bind his heir by will not to raise his house to such an extent
as to interfere with the lights of his neighbor's house; or to permit
his neighbor to insert a beam into his wall; or to allow the water to
fall upon his premises; or to permit him to walk or drive through his
property, or to conduct water from the same.^1^

TITLE IV. CONCERNING USUFRUCT.

Usufruct is the right to use and enjoy the property of others without
injuring its substance; for it is a right over the essential matter, and
if it should be destroyed, the right would necessarily also be
extinguished.

\(1) Usufruct is susceptible of separation from property, and this
happens in many ways. For example, where anyone bequeaths the usufruct
to another, as in this instance the heir would have the bare property
and the legatee the usufruct; and, on the other hand, if he should
bequeath the land, omitting the usufruct, the legatee would have the
bare property and the heir the usufruct; and also he can leave the
usufruct to one person and the land with the usufruct deducted to
another; but if anyone wishes to create an usufruct except by will, he
must do so by means of agreements and stipulations. However, in or-

^1^ Servitudes, or *jura in alieno solo*, are, of course, the easements
of the Common Law. Their very nature required them to attach to the
property of another, for, as above stated, no one could have the benefit
of a servitude on his own land: "*Res propria nemini servit.*" Being
incorporeal hereditaments they were not susceptible of division, a
principle which rendered all the heirs of an estate to which such a
privilege belonged liable for its continuance; and, on the other hand,
enabled every heir of the owner of the dominant tenement to bring an
action to compel the performance of the service to which the estate was
entitled.

Servitudes were of two kinds, real and personal. They always consisted
in permitting some act to be done, or to refrain from performing some
act, hence their character was essentially passive, and no effort could
be exerted by the owner of the servient tenement; "*Servitus in faciendo
consistere non potest.*" A real servitude existed where a building or a
tract of land was charged with some burden for the benefit of another; a
personal servitude was one imposed upon real property and which was
productive of advantage to a certain individual, such as use, usufruct,
and the right of habitation or gratuitous residence.

A real servitude was ordinarily perpetual; a personal one terminated
with the life of the person for whose benefit it was established.

Servitudes were created by will, by prescription, and by agreement. They
were lost by the consolidation of the ownership of both tenements in the
same individual; by non-user of the privilege during the term of years
prescribed by law, or by its open and acknowledged abandonment. It was
not presumed, and its existence was required to be conclusively shown by
the party asserting a claim to it. The owner of the property subject to
the right was not permitted, in any way, to interfere with its exercise;
nor could he in whom it was vested do anything by which the burden might
be increased or rendered oppressive or vexatious. It was a necessary
characteristic of a continuous servitude that it should not be liable to
interruption, that is, that its use should always be at the disposal of
the estate or person entitled to its enjoyment. Where a discontinuous
servitude existed, mere

der that property may not be rendered useless for the reason that the
usufruct has been perpetually deducted, it has been decided that the
usufruct may, under certain circumstances, be extinguished and revert to
the owner.

\(2) Moreover, an usufruct may be created not only over land and
buildings, but also over slaves, beasts of burden and all other
property, except such as is consumed by use; for things of this kind are
not susceptible of usufruct either by natural reason or according to the
Civil Law. In this category are included wine, oil, grain, and clothing,
and that of coin greatly resembles these, because money is, to a certain
degree, worn away by constant interchange; but, on account of public
convenience, the Senate decreed that usufruct could be established even
over such property if sufficient security for it were given to the heir.
Therefore, where the usufruct of money is bequeathed, it is given to the
legatee in such a way that it becomes his property, and the latter must
give security to the heir to return the same amount of money, if he
should die or be deprived of civil rights.

The other property is also delivered to the legatee in such a way as to
belong to him, but he must furnish security for the appraised value of
the same, that if he dies or is deprived of civil rights a sum of money
equal to the appraised value of said property shall be repaid. The
Senate, therefore, did not in fact create an usufruct in such property,
for it had not power to do so, but by means of the bond it established a
quasi-usufruct.

\(3) An usufruct is ended by the death of the usufructuary, or by the
two kinds of loss of civil rights designated the greatest and the
intermediate, or by not using it according to the manner or time
prescribed; all of which matters have been decided by one of Our
Constitutions. An usufruct is also terminated when it is surrendered by
the usufructuary to the owner of the property (for a transfer to a third
party is void); or, on the other hand, if the usufructuary acquires the
ownership of the property, which is called consolidation. Furthermore,
it has been settled that if a house has been consumed by fire, or
destroyed by an earthquake, or falls down from decay, the usufruct is
extinguished, and not even the usufruct of the ground is due.

non-user did not abrogate the privilege; the owner of the serviant
estate must, in some way or other, have prevented the person or tenement
in whose favor it was created from profiting by it.

The doctrine of easements is undoubtedly derived from the Civil Law; but
in certain respects the easement materially differs from the servitude.
The latter is a term of broader scope, and includes pecuniary gain,
usually not conceded by English law to the easement, which is primarily
a convenience. Originally, a servitude could not be acquired by
prescription, a rule that did not apply to the easement, which could
always be acquired in this manner. In England, the obligations of the
Feudal System gave rise to the performance of active servitudes, which
were not tolerated at Civil Law.

The subject of servitudes was treated exhaustively by the Roman jurists,
and the principles governing them laid down with great minuteness and
accuracy. The rules concerning easements have never been so strictly
defined in either England or America, and in many instances the
decisions of the courts in both countries are more or less
contradictory. Â— ED.

\(4) When, therefore, the usufruct is terminated, as a matter of course
it clearly reverts to the ownership, and from that time the owner of the
bare land begins to have full power over the property.

TITLE V. CONCERNING USE AND HABITATION.

A bare use is established in the very same ways as a usufruct, and is
also terminated in exactly the same ways as the usufruct ceases to
exist.

\(1) As a matter of fact, the right of use is inferior to that of
usufruct; for he who has the bare use of land is not regarded as
entitled to anything but such herbs, fruits, flowers, hay, straw, and
wood, as he requires for his daily necessities; and he is only allowed
to remain on the land in such a way as not to molest the owner of the
same, or hinder those engaged in farm labor; nor has he authority to
sell, hire, or give what he has to any other party without compensation,
while he who enjoys the usufruct can do all these things.

\(2) Moreover, he who has the use of a house is considered only to have
the right to live there himself, and he cannot transfer this right to
another, and it seems scarcely to have been admitted that he could even
entertain a guest. He has, however, the right to live there with his
wife and children, and with his freedmen as well, and also with such
other freeborn persons as he employs along as his slaves; and, in like
manner, if the use of the house belongs to a woman, she can reside there
with her husband.

\(3) Moreover, he who has the use of a slave can only himself, employ
both the labor and services of the slave, but he is not allowed, under
any circumstances, to transfer his right to another, and undoubtedly the
same rule applies to a beast of burden.

\(4) If the use of cattle or sheep is bequeathed, the party entitled to
it can neither use the milk, lambs, or wool, because they are included
in the increase, but it is clear that he may use the cattle for the
purpose of manuring his land.

\(5) But where the right of habitation has been bequeathed to anyone or
established in any other way, this is classed as neither use nor
usufruct, but a certain peculiar right, as it were; therefore according
to an opinion of Marcellus, and for the sake of public expediency We
have permitted, by a decision which We have promulgated, that persons
who enjoy the right of habitation may not only reside there themselves,
but also lease the property to others.

\(6) What We have stated concerning servitudes, usufruct, and habitation
must suffice; with reference to inheritance and obligations We shall
discuss them in their proper places. We have stated briefly in what ways
property is acquired by the Law of Nations, let us now examine how it is
acquired by legal enactment and the Civil Law.

TITLE VI.

CONCERNING USUCAPTION AND POSSESSION FOR LONG TIME.

It was established by the Civil Law that where a person purchased
property, or obtained it by gift or in any other lawful manner from one
who was not the owner, but whom he believed to be the owner, if the said
property was a chattel, he would acquire it by use after a year; and if
it was immovable, after two years Â— in case it was on Italian soil; in
order that the ownership of property might not be uncertain. And since
this had been decided because the ancients thought that the aforesaid
terms were sufficient for the owners to inquire after their property, a
preferable opinion occurred to Us in order to prevent owners from being
deprived of their property too soon, and that this advantage might not
be restricted to any certain locality. Hence, We have promulgated a
Constitution with reference to this matter, by which it has been
provided that personal property shall be acquired by use for three
years, but real-estate by possession for a long time, (that is after ten
years, where the parties are present, and after twenty where they are
absent); and that by these provisions the ownership of property shall be
acquired not only in Italy, but in all countries subject to Our Imperial
jurisdiction, where a just ground of possession has previously existed.

\(1) In some cases, however, although a party may have possession in
good faith, usucaption will not profit him during any period of time;
for instance, where anyone has possession of a freeman, sacred or
religious property, or a fugitive slave.

\(2) Title to stolen property and that of which possession has been
obtained by force cannot be acquired by use, even if held in good faith
for the terms aforesaid; for the Law of the Twelve Tables and the *Lex
Atinia *prohibit the acquisition of stolen property, and the *Lex Julia
et Plautia* that of property obtained by force.

\(3) When it is stated that usucaption of property which has been stolen
or acquired by force is forbidden by law, it does not mean that the
thief himself or the party who obtained possession by force cannot
acquire ownership by usucaption (for it does not run in favor of such
persons for another reason, that is because they are guilty of bad
faith) but that no one else has that right, even though he may purchase
the property from them, or obtain it in any other way in good faith.
Therefore, with reference to personal property, usucaption does not
really benefit a possessor in good faith, because he who sold the
property of another, or transferred it in any other way, is guilty of
stealing it.

\(4) Sometimes, however, the case is different, for if an heir be- ,
lieving that property which has been loaned, hired, or deposited with
the deceased, is a portion of the estate, sells it to another party, or
bestows it as a dowry on another in good faith, there is no question
that he who receives it can acquire title to it by use, since it is not
vitiated

by theft, as the heir who alienated it in good faith, as his own, was
not guilty of theft.

\(5) Again, if he to whom the usufruct of a female slave belongs,
believing her offspring to be his own, sells, or gives it away, he does
not commit theft, for a theft is not committed without the intention of
stealing.

\(6) This can also happen in other ways, as where anyone, without the
defect of theft, transfers property belonging to another to a third
party, and causes the title to it to be acquired by the latter through
usucaption.

\(7) Ownership of property attached to the soil is, however, more easily
obtained; as, for instance, where anyone gains possession of land which
is unoccupied on account of the absence or negligence of the owner, or
because the latter died without leaving a successor; for although the
former acts in bad faith, (because he knows that he has taken possession
of land belonging to someone else) nevertheless, if he conveys it to a
third party who accepts it in good faith, the latter can obtain the
ownership of the same by long possession, because he did not accept it
either as being stolen or acquired by force; for the opinion entertained
by certain ancient authorities, who believed that there could be a theft
of land and place, is abrogated; and by certain Imperial Constitutions
the rights of those in possession of real property are protected, so
that no one can be deprived of them after long and undisputed
possession.

\(8) Sometimes, however, property can be obtained by use even if it has
been stolen or acquired by force; for example, if it is returned to the
control of the owner, for then the defect in the title to said property
having been removed its usucaption proceeds.

\(9) Property belonging to Our Treasury is not subject to usucaption.
Papinian, however, held that when property without ownership has not yet
been brought to the notice of the Treasury, a purchaser in good faith
can acquire by usucaption any portion of the same which has been
transferred to him; and the Divine Pius as well as the Divine Severus
and Antoninus promulgated this rule in Rescripts.

\(10) Finally, it should be noted that for property of this kind to be
obtained by a purchaser in good faith, or acquired in any other lawful
way, must be such that it is free from any defect.

\(11) The error of a false title does not bring about usucaption; for
example, where a man who has not made a purchase, but thinking that he
has done so holds possession; or when anyone to whom property was not
given believes that he holds it by virtue of a gift.

\(12) Long possession which has begun to run in favor of a deceased
person is continued for the benefit of his heir and the possessor of the
estate, even though the latter may know that the land belongs to someone
else. If, however, the deceased did not have a legal title in the
beginning, possession does not profit the heir and the possessor of the
estate, even though they may not be aware of the fact; and this Our
Constitution has declared shall also be observed in the case of
usucaptions, in order that the time may be continued.

\(13) The deceased Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript
that the times with reference to the possession of buyer and seller
should be continuous. It was provided by an Edict of the Divine Marcus,
that anyone who has purchased property belonging to another from the
Treasury, can, where five years have elapsed since the sale,
successfully defend the case against the owner of the property by
alleging this fact. Still, a Constitution of Zeno, of sacred memory, has
very properly provided in case of such as have obtained any property
from the Treasury by sale, donation, or any other title, that they shall
at once be secure, and be victorious whether they sue or are sued; and,
on the other hand, that where persons think they have any cause of
action arising out of the ownership or hypothecation of the property
alienated, they may sue the Imperial Treasury within the term of four
years. A divine Constitution of Ours which We have recently promulgated,
is made applicable to those who have received anything from Our palace,
or from that of the venerated Empress; the provisions embraced in the
aforesaid Constitution of Zeno having reference to alienations made by
the Treasury.

TITLE VII. CONCERNING GIFTS.

A gift is also another kind of acquisition. There are two kinds of
gifts, that is one made in expectation of death, and one that is not so
made.

\(1) A *donatio mortis causa* is one made with the prospect of death, as
when anyone makes such a gift with the understanding that the party who
accepts shall retain what is given if any calamity should come upon the
donor, but if the latter should survive, or repent of having made the
donation, or if the party to whom it is given should die first, the
donor shall in that case receive it again. These donations' *mortis
causa* are, in every respect, governed by the same rules as legacies;
for as a doubt existed among men learned in the law as to whether it was
proper to class such a donation as a gift or a legacy, because it
possessed some of the distinctive features of both; and as some of the
authorities assigned it to one class, and some to the other, We
promulgated a Constitution that it should, in almost every instance, be
included in the category of legacies, and be treated in the way which
Our Constitution prescribes. On the whole, a *donatio mortis causa* is
made when the donor prefers that he himself should have the gift rather
than the party to whom it is given, and that the donee should have it
rather than his heir. And in this way, in Homer, Telemachus makes a gift
to PirÃ¦us:

"PirÃ¦us, as we do not know in what way these things will end, if the
haughty suitors secretly kill me in the palace, and divide among
themselves all the property derived from my ancestors; I desire that you
shall possess and enjoy it rather than any of them; but if I plant
slaughter and death among them, that you shall then gladly bring it to
me rejoicing at my house."

\(2) Another kind of gifts are such as are made without any thought of
death, and which we call *inter vivos*. These can in no way be compared
to legacies, and where they are perfected cannot rashly be revoked. They
are perfected as soon as the donor has indicated his intention, whether
in writing or verbally, and, as in the case of a sale, Our Constitution
has imposed upon such gifts the necessity of delivery, so that even if
they are not delivered at once they have the most full and perfect
effect, and the obligation of delivery is placed upon the donor. And, as
formerly the decrees of certain Emperors compelled such gifts to be
publicly recorded if they exceed the value of two hundred *solidi*, Our
Constitution has increased the amount to five hundred *solidi*, and has
prescribed that such a gift shall be valid without being recorded; and
has also designated certain gifts which require no record whatever to be
made, but of themselves are perfectly valid.

In addition to this We have prescribed many other rules for the better
completion of gifts, all of which are to be ascertained from the
Constitutions which We have promulgated with reference to this matter.
It must be remembered, however, that even after gifts have been
thoroughly perfected,^1^ We have by one of Our Constitutions granted
permission to the donors to revoke them in certain cases where persons
on whom the benefit was conferred are ungrateful; so that those who have
transferred their property to others may not suffer any injury or loss
from them, as set forth in Our Constitution.

\(3) There is another kind of donation *inter vivos* which was entirely
unknown to the ancient legal authorities but was afterwards introduced
by later Emperors. This was formerly designated *ante nuptias*, and was
based upon the tacit condition that it was only to be valid when
marriage took place; for the reason that such a gift was always bestowed
before marriage, and was never given after the nuptials had been
solemnized. The Divine Justin, Our father, was the first who, by one of
his Constitutions, permitted gifts to be increased after marriage and
where anything of this kind took place, a gift *ante nuptias* could also
be increased, even- after the marriage had been celebrated;
nevertheless, the unsuitable name survived, as the gift was still called
"*ante nuptias*", although it was increased after marriage. But We,
desiring to provide rules in the most perfect manner, and wishing names
to bear some relation to things, have decreed that donations of this
description may not only be increased but may be instituted during
marriage, and that they shall not be called *ante nuptias*, but *propter
nuptias*, and be classed with dowries in this respect, and that just as
dowries can not only be increased but also created during marriage, so
gifts of this kind introduced "on account of marriage" may not only
antedate the ceremony, but may also be increased or originated after it
has been performed.

\(4) There was formerly still another method of acquiring property under
the Civil Law, that is to say, by the right of accretion, which is

^1^ That is by possession: "*Donatio perficitur possessione
accipientis.*" Â— ED.

the following: where anyone owns a slave in common with Titius and he
himself alone gave him his freedom either before a magistrate, or by
will; in a case of this kind his share in him was lost and vested in his
partner. However, as it established a very bad precedent for the slave
to be defrauded of his freedom and on this account loss be suffered by
the more humane owner, and for those who are more cruel to profit by it,
We have considered it necessary by means of one of Our Constitutions to
correct a condition full of injustice, by having recourse to a merciful
remedy; and We have found a way by which both the manumitter, his
partner, and he who receives freedom may enjoy Our kindness, and the
gift of liberty become effective (in favor of which it is perfectly
clear that the ancient legislators prescribed many things in opposition
to ordinary rules), so that he who bestowed the freedom may rejoice in
the security of his liberality, and his partner be indemnified by
receiving the price of the slave in proportion to his interest in him,
in accordance with the scale of ownership which We have established.

TITLE VIII. WHO Is PERMITTED TO ALIENATE, AND WHO Is NOT.

It sometimes happens that the owner cannot alienate, and, on the other
hand, he who is not the owner has the power to alienate; for, by the
*Lex Julia*, a husband is forbidden to alienate land given as a dowry
without the consent of his wife, although when it is given to him as a
dowry it belongs to him; but We, having amended the *Lex Julia*, have
placed it in a better condition, for, as this law applied only to
property in Italy and prohibited alienations made against the wife's
consent, as well as hypothecations even when she was willing, have
applied a remedy to both cases, so that alienations and encumbrances are
forbidden even where the property is situated in the provinces, and
neither of these transactions shall take place even with the consent of
wives; lest the weakness peculiar to the female sex might be taken
advantage of to the detriment of their property.

\(1) But, on the other hand, a creditor can, where an agreement has been
made to do so, alienate a pledge even though it does not belong to him.
This may perhaps appear to have been done because it is understood that
the pledge is alienated with the consent of the debtor, who in the
beginning agreed that the creditor could sell it if the money were not
paid. However, to prevent creditors from being obstructed in the
prosecution of their rights, or debtors from seeming to lose the
ownership of their property too readily, this has been provided for by
Our Constitution, and a certain method has been prescribed by which a
sale of pledges can be made, and by the tenor of which sufficient and
abundant security has been furnished for all parties, both creditors and
debtors.

\(2) In the next place we must remember that no male or female ward can
alienate anything without the consent of his or her guardian. Therefore,
if anyone lends money to either without the consent of the

guardian, he does not contract any obligation, for the reason that he
does not make the money the property of the recipient; and hence it can
be recovered by an action if it is still in the hands of the party to
whom it was given; but if the said money has been expended by the
recipient in good faith, an action for its value will lie; and if in bad
faith, an action for its production can be brought.

On the other hand, any kind of property may legally be given to a ward
of either sex without the consent of the guardian. Therefore, if a
debtor pays a ward, the consent of his guardian is requisite; otherwise
he will not be released, and this which is evidently most consonant with
reason, We have promulgated in a Constitution addressed to the advocates
of CÃ¦sarea, at the suggestion of Tribonian, that most eminent man, the
QuÃ¦stor of Our Sacred Palace, in which it is stated that the debtor of a
ward may pay his guardian or curator, in case permission has been
obtained from a judge to do so, without any expense; so that when this
has been done, and the judge has granted his permission, and the debtor
has paid his debt, the most ample security attaches to a payment of this
description.

Where, however, payment has been made in any other manner than We have
prescribed, and the ward has the money in his possession, or has become
more wealthy through the payment of the same, and again, claims the
amount he can be barred by the exception on the ground of fraud; and
even though he may have squandered it, or lost it by theft, the plea of
fraud will be of no advantage to the debtor, but he must, nevertheless,
be condemned because he rashly made the payment without the authority of
the guardian, and in contravention of Our Decree. On the other hand,
however, male and female wards cannot make payment without the authority
of their guardians, because whatever they pay does not belong to the
recipient, as it is clearly evident that no alienation of property can
be made by them without the consent of their guardian.

TITLE IX.

THROUGH WHAT PERSONS PROPERTY CAN BE ACQUIRED FOR Us.

Property is acquired for us not only by ourselves but also through those
whom we have under our control, as well as through slaves in whom we
have the usufruct, and also through freemen and the slaves of other
persons of whom we hold possession in good faith. Let us with care
examine these cases separately.

\(1) Formerly, your children of either sex, of whom you had control,
acquired for the benefit of their ascendants without any distinction,
everything that came to them with the exception of the *peculium
castrense, *and it became the property of their ascendants to such an
extent that they could give or sell to a stranger, or make any
disposition they pleased of whatever they acquired through either a son
or a daughter; a provision which seemed to Us to be inhuman, and
therefore, by a general Constitution which We promulgated, We have

brought relief to the children, and reserved for the parents that to
which they were entitled; for it has been decreed by Us that if any
advantage accrues to a child from the property of his father, it shall
be entirely acquired by him for his ascendant in accordance with the
ancient rule (for what injustice is there in property returning to an
ascendant when it was originally derived from him?); but whatever the
son of a family has acquired for himself in any other way he shall
obtain the usufruct of for the benefit of his ascendant, although the
ownership of the same remains in him; in order that any acquisition
obtained by his own labor, or from good fortune may not be a cause of
vexation to him by passing under the control of another.

\(2) It has also been decreed by Us, in the case where an ascendant
emancipated a child, and might, by former Constitutions reserve for
himself, if he so desired, a third part of the property which could not
be acquired by him, by way of the price of emancipation, as it were, and
it resulted unjustly therefrom that the son, by means of this
emancipation, was defrauded of the ownership of a part of the property;
and thus, while there was an increase of honor conferred upon him by
emancipation, through which he became his own master, this was lessened
through the diminution of his estate. Hence, We have decreed that,
instead of the third part of the ownership of the property which the
ascendant could formerly retain, he shall now retain half, not of the
ownership, but of the usufruct; so that the estate will remain intact in
the son, and the father will have the benefit of a larger amount and
obtain half instead of a third.

\(3) Again, property is acquired by your benefit when your slaves obtain
it by delivery, stipulate for it, or obtain it in any other manner; for
this falls to you without your knowledge or consent, as a slave who is
under the control of another can have nothing of his own. But if he
should be appointed an heir, he cannot enter upon the estate unless by
your order; and if he does so by your order you will be entitled to the
inheritance, just as if you yourself had been appointed the heir; and,
in like manner, a legacy is undoubtedly acquired by you through your
slaves. And not only is the title to property acquired by you through
those who are under your control, but possession of the same as well;
for whatever property they may have obtained possession of, you are
considered to possess. Therefore, usucaption or possession for a length
of time also accrues to you through them.^1^

\(4) However, with reference to slaves in whom you have only an
usufruct, it has been decided that whatever they acquire by means of
your property or their own labor, is obtained for you; but whatever they
earn by other means belongs to their owner. Therefore if a slave of this
kind be appointed an heir, or any legacy or gift be bestowed upon him,
the proprietorship of the same does not pass to the usufruct-

^1^ The rule forbidding ownership by dependents is of high antiquity. It
is stated in the Laws of Menu that: "Three persons, a wife, a son, and a
slave, are declared by law to have, in general, no wealth exclusively
their own; the wealth, which they may earn, is regularly acquired for
the man to whom they belong." (Sir Wm. Jones' Works, The Laws of Menu,
Page 333.) Â— ED.

uary but to the owner of the slave. The same rule is applicable to one
of whom you hold possession in good faith, whether he be a freeman or
the slave of another; for whatever applies to the usufructuary also
applies to a possessor in good faith. Therefore, whatever is obtained by
other means than those two belongs to the party himself, if he is free,
or to his master, if he is a slave. But when a possessor has acquired
the slave by usucaption, since in this way he becomes his owner, he can
acquire property through him under all circumstances; but an
usufructuary cannot acquire a slave by usucaption; first, because he
does not have possession but merely the right of usufruct; and second,
because he knows that the slave belongs to another.

Moreover, not only ownership, but possession as well, is gained for you
through slaves in whom you have the usufruct, or of whom you hold
possession in good faith, or through a person who is free and serves you
in good faith; but in each of these cases We speak with reference to the
explanation which We have just given, that is to say, that it only
relates to instances where they acquire possession by means of your
property or their own labor.

\(5) Therefore, from this it appears that under no circumstances can
property be obtained for you through freemen whom you do not have
lawfully under your control, or hold possession of in good faith; nor
through the slaves of others in whom you have not the usufruct, nor of
whom you have legal possession. For this reason it is stated on the
authority of a Constitution of the Divine Severus that nothing can be
acquired through a stranger, except it be done through a person who is
free, as, for instance, through an agent, not only when you were aware
of it but also without your knowledge; and by means of such possession
ownership also may be obtained, if the party who delivered the property
was the owner of the same; or usucaption or prescription may be acquired
by lapse of time, if the party was not the owner.

\(6) Sufficient has been said up to this time, as to the means by which
particular kinds of property are acquired; for of the law of legacies,
by which special kinds of property are acquired by you, and of that of
trusts by which special property is left to you, We shall treat more
appropriately elsewhere. Therefore let Us now examine in what ways
property is acquired by you as a whole. Thus, if you have been made the
heir of anyone; or if you lay claim to the possession of his property;
or if you arrogate anyone; or if some person's effects are transferred
to you for the purpose of preserving the advantages of freedom, his
entire estate vests in you.

In the first place, let Us examine inheritances, of which there are two
kinds, for they pass to you either by will or by intestacy.

First We shall treat of what comes to you by will, in discussing which
subject it is necessary to begin by showing in what way wills should be
executed.

TITLE X. CONCERNING THE EXECUTION OF WILLS.

A testament is so called because it is an evidence of the intention of
the mind.

\(1) In order, however, that no regulation of antiquity may be entirely
lost sight of, it must be remembered that formerly two kinds of
testaments were in use; one of which was employed when peace and
tranquillity prevailed, and was designated *testamentum in comitia
calata;* the other was made use of when battle was imminent, and it was
styled *testamentum in procinctu. A *third kind of testament was called
*testamentum per Ã¦s et libram, *for the reason that it was brought about
by emancipation, that is, through a fictitious sale in the presence of
five witnesses and a balance-holder, who were required to be Roman
citizens that had reached puberty, and another party, who was designated
the "purchaser of the estate". The two first mentioned kinds of
testaments have long since fallen into desuetude; and that which was
brought about *per Ã¦s* *et libram*, although it lasted for a longer time
is also, so far as a certain portion of it is concerned, no longer used.

\(2) The forms of testaments above set forth are derived from the Civil
Law, but subsequently another was introduced by an edict of the PrÃ¦tor;
for by his honorary law no emancipation was required, but the seals of
seven witnesses were considered sufficient, while by the Civil Law the
seals of witnesses were unnecessary.

\(3) But when both by the custom of men and by the amendments of
Constitutions, the Civil and PrÃ¦torian law began gradually to be brought
into harmony, it was decided that testaments should be finished at one
and the same time (which the Civil Law, to a certain extent exacted) in
the presence of seven witnesses, and with the signatures of the latter
(which was established by the Constitutions) and (as prescribed by the
Edict of the PrÃ¦tor) that their seals should be attached to wills; so
that this regulation seems to be threefold, as witnesses and their
continuous presence are required to render the execution of the will
valid are derived from the Civil Law; the signatures of the testator and
the witnesses are employed through observance of the Sacred
Constitutions; while the seals and the number of witnesses are
prescribed by the Edict of the PrÃ¦tor.

\(4) To all these formalities instituted for the purpose of establishing
the genuineness of testaments that no fraud may be introduced, the
following provision has been added from one of Our Constitutions, that
the name of the heir must be written by the hand of the testator or a
witness, and that everything must be done according to the tenor of the
said Constitution.

\(5) The witnesses can all seal the will with one signet ring (but what
if the seven rings were engraved with one device?) and according to the
opinion of Pomponius they can even impress their seals with a ring
belonging to another party.

\(6) Those also may act as witnesses who have testamentary capacity or
are entitled to take under the will; but neither a woman, nor anyone who
has not reached puberty, nor a slave, nor one who is dumb, deaf, or
insane, nor a person deprived of the control of his property, nor he
whom the laws have declared infamous and incapable of testifying, can be
included in the number of witnesses.

\(7) But when one of the witnesses to a will was supposed to be free at
the time it was executed, but subsequently was shown to be a slave, the
Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript to Catonius Verus, (as also the
Divine Severus and Antoninus did subsequently;) "that he would by his
liberality sustain the will, so that it would be considered properly
executed, since at the time when it was sealed the witness was, by the
consent of all parties, classed in the number of freemen, nor was there
anyone who raised a question as to his condition".

\(8) A father and anyone under his control, or two brothers who are
under the control of the same father, can both be witnesses to the same
will; for the reason that no injury can result from several witnesses
belonging to the same family acting in the business transaction of
another person.

\(9) A party under the control of the testator ought not to be a
witness, but if a son after his discharge from the army makes a will
disposing of his *castrense peculium*, neither his father nor anyone
under the control of the latter can legally act as a witness; for in a
matter of this kind the testimony of a member of the same family is
rejected.

\(10) Nor can he who has been appointed an heir nor anyone who is under
his control, nor his father who has authority over him, nor his
brothers, who are under the control of the same father, be allowed to
act as witnesses; because the entire transaction relating to the
execution of the will is at present considered to be carried on between
the heir and the testator; for although the entire law on this point was
formerly greatly confused, and the ancients who excluded the "purchaser
of the estate" and those connected with him by paternal power from
acting as witnesses to wills, permitted the heir and those connected
with him by paternal power to testify respecting wills; and while
conceding the right, advised them to abuse it as little as possible; We,
nevertheless, for Our part, correcting this provision, and enacting into
a legal obligation what was only recommended by the ancient authorities,
have returned to the rule relating to the said "purchaser of the estate"
as it was formerly employed, and have denied the heir, on account of his
resemblance to the said "purchaser", as well as the persons who are
connected with him as above stated, the right under any circumstances,
to give evidence in their own behalf, and therefore We have not
permitted the ancient Constitution relating to this subject to be
inserted into Our Code.

\(11) We do not however deny this right of testifying to legatees and
the beneficiaries of trusts, because they are not legal successors, nor
do We deny it to other persons connected with them, Â— but on the
contrary, We have especially granted it by one of Our Constitutions Â—

and much more readily do We give such permission to those under whose
authority they are, or who have them under their control.

\(12) It does not matter whether a will be written on tablets, papyrus,
parchment, or any other substance.

\(13) Anyone can make several copies of a single will, provided they are
all executed in accordance with the prescribed formalities; and this is
sometimes necessary where a party is about to make a sea-voyage and
desires both to take with him and leave at home the proof of his
intentions, or for many other reasons arising from human necessities.

\(14) These, therefore, are the regulations with reference to written
wills. If, however, anyone desires to make an unwritten will according
to the Civil Law, let him bear in mind that if seven witnesses are
called in, and his intention verbally stated in their presence, this
will constitute a thoroughly complete and valid testament in accordance
with the Civil Law.

TITLE XI. CONCERNING THE WILL OP A SOLDIER.

The rigorous necessity of compliance with the above stated formalities
in the execution of wills, has been relaxed by certain Imperial
Constitutions in the case of soldiers, on account of their great lack of
knowledge; for although they may not have summoned a legal number of
witnesses, or observed some other testamentary formality their wills
are, nevertheless, valid, that is to say so long as they are in actual
service; a rule which one of Our Constitutions has very justly
established. Therefore, in whatever way the last will of a soldier can
be ascertained, whether it is in writing or not, his testament is valid
as the expression of his will. But during those times when they are
living in their own homes or elsewhere exempt from the requirements of
military service, they are, by no means entitled to the enjoyment of
this privilege; but they are permitted, even though sons of a family, to
make a will by reason of their connection with the army, but only in
compliance with the same testamentary formalities and rules governing
wills which We have recently prescribed with reference to the wills of
civilians.

\(1) The Divine Trajan stated clearly in a Rescript addressed to
Statilius Severus, concerning the testaments of soldiers: "The privilege
granted to those in actual service, that their testaments shall be
considered valid in whatever way they have been executed by them, should
be understood in this manner, namely: that it must first manifestly
appear that a will was made, and one can be made without writing even by
persons who do not belong to the army.

"If therefore the soldier, respecting the disposition of whose estate
inquiry is made of you, having called men together for the purpose of
making his will, spoke in such a way as to indicate whom he wished to be
his heir, and on whom he desired to bestow freedom, he may be understood
to have made an unwritten will in this manner, and it shall

be considered binding. But if, (as frequently happens in conversation)
he said to someone; 'I make you my heir'; or 'I leave you my property';
this must not be deemed a will, and it is to the interest of no one more
than to that of those to whom this privilege is granted that a precedent
of this description should not be admitted; otherwise, it would not be
difficult, after the death of any soldier, to obtain witnesses who would
state that they heard him say that he left his property to anyone they
chose, and by this means his true intentions might be annulled."

\(2) A soldier, even though he be dumb or deaf, can make a will.

\(3) This is conceded by an Imperial Constitution to them only so long
as they serve and live in camps, but veterans, after they have been
discharged, and soldiers, still in service who make wills while absent
from camp, must comply with the regulations common to all Roman
citizens. A will which they have made in camp, where the usual
formalities were not observed but in any way they may desire, shall only
be valid for a year after their discharge. What then would be the case
if the soldier died within the year, and the condition imposed upon his
heir was not complied with until after the year had elapsed? Would the
will, as that of a soldier, be valid? It has been decided that it would
be valid as a military testament.

\(4) Moreover, if anyone made an irregular will before joining the army,
and, after he had become a soldier and was in service, he unsealed it
and added something to, or omitted something from the same, or his
intention to consider this as his valid will was disclosed in any other
way; it must be held that the will is valid, because of his new
intention as a soldier.

\(5) Finally, where a soldier is adopted, or the son of a family is
emancipated, his will is valid as that of a soldier by any new
manifestation of intention, and is not deemed to be void through his
loss of civil rights.

\(6) It must also be borne in mind that, following the example of the
*castrense peculium*, former laws as well as Imperial Constitutions
bestowed upon certain persons a *quasi-castrense peculium;* and some of
these were even permitted to make a will while they were under parental
authority; which right one of Our Constitutions extending more widely,
permits all of them to make a will merely disposing of such property,
but observing the ordinary formalities. By examining the contents of
this Constitution one cannot remain in ignorance of any of the matters
which have reference to the right above mentioned.

TITLE XII. WHO ARE NOT PERMITTED TO MAKE WILLS.

All persons, however, are not allowed to make a will, for, in the first
place, those who are subjected to the control of another have not the
right of testation; to such an extent, indeed, that even if their
parents have given them permission they nevertheless cannot legally
execute a will; with the exception of those whom We have previously
enum-

erated, and this especially applies to soldiers who are under parental
control, to whom permission is granted by Imperial Constitutions to make
a will disposing of whatever property they may have acquired while in
camp. This right was originally granted only to soldiers in active
service, by the authority of the Divine Augustus as well as by that of
Nerva, and also by that of the distinguished Emperor Trajan, and
afterwards, by an indorsement of the Divine Hadrian it was conceded to
soldiers who had been discharged, that is to say, to veterans.
Therefore, if any of them have made a will disposing of their *castrense
peculium*, it will belong to those whom they may have constituted their
heirs, and if they died intestate, without any surviving children or
brothers, the property will belong to their parents by the usual rule of
succession.

We may learn from this that whatever a soldier who is under parental
authority acquires while in camp, cannot be appropriated by his father,
or sold, or otherwise interfered with by his father's creditors; nor,
after his father's death, does it become the common property of his
brothers, but that which is acquired while in camp absolutely belongs to
the said soldier; although, according to the Civil Law, the private
property of all those who are under parental authority is considered a
portion of the father's estate, in the same manner as the private
property of slaves is included in that of their masters; with the
exception of such as, by the Sacred Constitutions of the Emperors, and
especially by Ours, is not acquired for various reasons. With the
exception of those who have a *castrense*, or a *quasi-castrense
peculium*, if the son of a family makes a will, it is void, even though
he dies after he becomes his own master.

\(1) Moreover, persons who have not reached puberty cannot make a will,
for the reason that they have no discretion, neither can insane persons
do so, because they are deficient in understanding.

Nor does it matter if a person who has not reached puberty should
afterwards do so, or the insane person afterwards become sane, and then
die. Where, however, insane persons make a will at a time when their
insanity is interrupted they are considered legally competent, and
certainly a will is valid which they may have made before becoming
insane, for insanity appearing afterwards does not invalidate a will
regularly executed or any other business matter properly transacted.

\(2) Moreover, a spendthrift to whom the control of his property has
been forbidden cannot make a will, but one which he made before the
prohibition was issued will be valid.

\(3) A person who is dumb and deaf cannot, at any time, make a will,
(but, of course, when we refer to a deaf person one is understood who
cannot hear at all, and not one who hears with difficulty; and by a dumb
person is understood one who cannot speak at all, and not one who speaks
with difficulty). As learned and educated men often lose the power of
hearing and speech through various accidents, for this reason one of Our
Constitutions comes to their relief; so that, in certain instances, and
by certain means in accordance with its provisions, they can make a
will, and do other things which are permitted to them.

But if anyone, after having made a will, becomes dumb or deaf from
illness, or from any other misfortune his will, nevertheless, continues
to be valid.

\(4) A blind man cannot make a will, except by observing the formalities
which a law of the Divine Justin, My father, introduced.

\(5) A will made by a captive in the enemy's country is void, even
though he should return; but one which he made in his own country is
valid by the *jus postliminium*, and also by the *Lex Cornelia* if he
should die there. -

TITLE XIII. CONCERNING THE DISINHERITANCE OF CHILDREN.

The observation of the rules which We have set forth above is not
however sufficient to render a will absolutely valid; but he who has a
son under his control must be careful either to appoint him heir, or to
disinherit him by name; otherwise, if he passes him over in silence the
will will be void; so that even if the son should die while his father
is still living, no one can become an heir under such a will, because it
was of course void from the beginning. This, in ancient times, however,
was not the rule with respect to daughters, or other descendants of
either sex through the male line; but where the heirs were not appointed
or disinherited, the will did not become void, but they were granted the
right to a certain portion of the estate by accretion, and it was not
necessary for the parents to disinherit these persons by name, but they
were permitted to do this by including them with others.

\(1) Anyone is deemed to be disinherited by name if this was done as
follows: "Let my son Titius be disinherited"; or thus: "Let my son be
disinherited"; without adding his proper name, that is, of course, if
there is no other son.

Posthumous children, or other heirs, must also be either appointed or
disinherited and, in this respect, the condition of all of them is the
same; that is to say, where a posthumous son or any other descendant of
either sex is passed over, the will is still valid; but after the birth
of a male or female posthumous descendant it is broken, and for this
reason becomes absolutely void. Therefore, if the woman from whom a
posthumous son or daughter was expected, miscarries, no impediment
exists to prevent the appointed heirs from entering upon the estate.
Persons of the female sex can be disinherited expressly or generally,
provided that, they are disinherited generally something is bequeathed
to them, lest they appear to have been passed over through
forgetfulness. It has been decided, however, that posthumous males, that
is sons and others in succession, cannot be legally disinherited unless
this is done specifically, that is to say, in the following way: "Let
any son who shall be born to me be disinherited".

\(2) Those who by succeeding take the place of a proper heir are in the
category of posthumous children, and become heirs to their relatives by
*quasi-agnation*, as, for instance, where anyone has a son under his
control and a grandson or granddaughter by him, the son alone has

the right of a proper heir, for the reason that he has priority in
degree, although the grandson and granddaughter by him are under the
same authority; but if his son should die while he is still living, or
should pass from under his control in any other way, the grandson or
granddaughter immediately takes his place in the succession, and in that
way obtains the rights of an heir by *quasi-agnation*. Therefore, to
avoid having his will invalidated in this manner, the testator must
either appoint his son his heir, or expressly disinherit him in order to
avoid making an irregular will; and he must also either appoint or
disinherit his grandson or granddaughter by his son, lest, if his son
should die while he is still living, his grandson or granddaughter, by
taking his place in the succession should break the will by
*quasi-agnation;* and this is provided by the *Lex Junia Velleia*, in
which also a method of disinheritance resembling that of posthumous
children is set forth.

\(3) By the Civil Law, it is not necessary either to appoint emancipated
children heirs, or to disinherit them because they are not proper heirs.
The PrÃ¦tor, however, orders all, both of the female as well as the male
sex to be disinherited if they are not appointed heirs, the males by
name, and those of the female sex in general terms; and if they are
neither appointed heirs nor disinherited in the way we have mentioned,
the PrÃ¦tor promises them possession of the estate in opposition to the
provisions of the will.

\(4) Adoptive children as long as they are under the control of their
father are held to be subject to the same regulation as those who are
the issue of legal marriage; and for this reason, they must be either
appointed heirs or disinherited according to the rules which We have
prescribed concerning ordinary children. But when they have been
emancipated by their adoptive father, they are not included among
children, either according to the Civil Law, or the Edict of the PrÃ¦tor.
By this rule it happens that, on the other hand, as long as they are in
the adoptive family they are classed as strangers so far as their own
parent is concerned; so that it is not necessary for him either to
appoint them heirs or to disinherit them. When, however, they have been
emancipated by their adoptive father, they then begin to be in the
condition in which they would have been if they had been emancipated by
their own father himself.

\(5) The following are the rules which the ancients introduced. As one
of Our Constitutions holding that no difference should exist between
males and females in the exercise of this right because each sex equally
performs its respective function in the procreation of the human race,
and since, by an ancient law of the Twelve Tables all are equally called
to the succession in case of intestacy Â— which opinion the PrÃ¦tors
appear to have subsequently adopted Â— introduced a simple and uniform
rule both for sons and daughters and other persons descending through
the male sex, whether born at the time or subsequently; that is, that
all, whether proper heirs or emancipated, must either be appointed heirs
or disinherited by name; and shall have the same effect in rendering the
wills of their parents void and invali-

dating the inheritance, which privilege sons who are proper heirs or
emancipated persons have whether they are already born, or still *in
utero *at that time and born subsequently. With respect to adopted
children, however, We have introduced a certain distinction which is
contained in the Constitution which We have enacted with reference to
those who have been adopted.

\(6) But where a soldier in active service makes a will and does not
disinherit by name his children already born, or those that are
posthumous, but passes them over in silence, not being ignorant whether
he has any or not; it has been established by certain Imperial
Constitutions that his silence is equivalent to an express declaration
of disinheritance.

\(7) A mother, or a maternal grandfather, is not required to either
appoint children heirs or disinherit them, but may simply omit
mentioning them, for the silence of a mother, a maternal grandfather, or
other ascendants on the mother's side has the same effect as
disinheritance by a father; nor is it necessary for a mother to
disinherit a son or daughter, nor for a maternal grandfather to
disinherit a grandson or granddaughter by his daughter, where they do
not appoint them heirs; whether We refer to the Civil Law, or to the
Edict of the PrÃ¦tor by which in opposition to the will, he promises the
possession of the estate to children who have been passed over, but
other relief has been provided for them which will soon be disclosed to
you.

TITLE XIV.

CONCERNING THE APPOINTMENT OF HEIRS.

It is permissible to appoint either freemen or slaves heirs, and either
your own slaves or those of others. In ancient times, however, in
accordance with the opinion of many persons, you were not allowed by law
to appoint your own slaves, unless this was done when their freedom was
granted at the same time; but at present, it is permitted by Our
Constitution to appoint them heirs without bestowing freedom upon them.
This rule We have introduced, not by way of innovation, but because it
was more just, and also because Paulus in the books which he wrote on
the works of Masurius Sabinus and Plautius, states that it was accepted
by Atilicinus. By "a person's own slave" is understood one in which the
testator has the mere ownership, and another the usufruct. There is an
instance, however, in which a slave is not legally appointed heir by his
mistress, even if his freedom is given him, as is provided by a
Constitution of the Divine Severus and Antoninus in the following words:
"It is reasonable that a slave polluted by adultery shall not be
considered legally manumitted by the will of his mistress, when she has
been accused of the crime and liberates him before sentence has been
passed; hence it follows that his appointment of heir by his mistress is
considered to be of no effect." "The slave of another" is understood to
be one in whom the testator has the usufruct.

\(1) A slave appointed heir by his master becomes by the will a free and
a necessary heir, if he remains in the same condition. If, however, he
is manumitted by the testator during his lifetime he can enter upon the
estate whenever he pleases, because he does not become a necessary heir,
since he does not obtain both freedom and the inheritance by the will of
his master. If he has been alienated, he must enter upon the estate by
the order of his new master, and in this way the latter becomes the heir
through him, for the alienated slave himself cannot be either free or
heir even though he was appointed heir, and his freedom given him;
becauses his master, when he alienated him is presumed to have revoked
the grant of liberty.

Where the slave of another is appointed an heir, and he remains in the
same condition, he must enter upon the estate by the order of his
master; but if he has been alienated by him, either during the life of
the testator or after his death and before he has entered upon the
estate, he must enter upon it by the order of his new master. If,
however, he has been manumitted during the testator's lifetime or after
his death and before he has entered upon the estate, he can enter upon
it at his own discretion.

\(2) A slave belonging to another may be legally appointed heir after
the death of his master, for the reason that testamentary disposition
exists in the case of slaves forming part of an estate; for as long as
the estate has not yet been entered upon, it represents the person, not
of the future heir, but of the defunct, so that even the slave of an
unborn child can legally be appointed heir.

\(3) Where a slave belongs to several persons who have the power of
testamentary disposition is appointed an heir by a stranger, he obtains
the estate for each one of his masters by whose command he enters upon
the same, in proportion to the share of ownership possessed by them
individually.

\(4) A person may appoint as heir one man, or as many as he wishes.

\(5) An estate is usually divided into twelve *unciÃ¦* which are included
in the appellation, as, and these parts also have their peculiar names
from the *uncia* up to the as as follows: *sextans, quadrans, triens,
quincunx, semis, septunx, bes, dodrans, dextans, deunx, as*. It is,
however, not necessary that there shall be twelve *unciÃ¦*, for as many
*uneiÃ¦* compose an as as the testator wishes; and if anyone makes a
party an heir to only a *semis*, the entire as will be included in the
*semis;* for the same person cannot die partly testate and partly
intestate unless he is a soldier, whose intention when he made his will
is solely considered; and, on the other hand, a man can divide his
estate into as many portions, or *unciÃ¦* as he wishes.

\(6) Where several heirs are appointed, the distinction of their shares
is only necessary where the testator is unwilling for them to inherit on
equal terms; for it has been sufficiently established that when no
shares are mentioned the heirs are entitled to participate equally.
Where the shares are specified with respect to certain persons, and
another is mentioned without any share being stated, then if

any part of the as remains undisposed of he will become heir to that
part; and if several are appointed without their shares being designated
they will all be entitled to that same portion. Where, however, the
entire as has been disposed of they are entitled to share in half of the
estate, and the party or parties will be entitled to share in the other
half; nor does it make any difference whether the heir without a share
is appointed first, between the others, or last, for that share is
understood to be given him which has not been disposed of.^1^

\(7) Let us see what the rule is where a certain portion has not been
disposed of and no heir has been appointed without a designated share;
as, for instance, where three heirs are each assigned a fourth. It is
settled that the part not disposed of belongs by implication to each in
proportion to his share in the estate, and the condition is the same as
if each was appointed heir to a third; and, on the other hand, if there
should be too many for the number of shares, there is by implication a
diminution of each; as for example, where four heirs are appointed for
three shares, it is to be considered just as if each one had been
assigned a fourth.

\(8) Where more than twelve *unciÃ¦* are disposed of, he who is appointed
without any share shall have what is lacking of two asses; and the same
rule applies where the double as is fully disposed of. All these shares
are ultimately reduced to a single as, though they may include more than
the ordinary number of *unciÃ¦*.

\(9) An heir may be appointed either unqualifiedly or under some
condition, but not from or to a certain time, as, for instance: "After
five years from my death"; or "From such-and-such *kalends";* or "To
such-and-such *kalends*, let So-and-So be my heir". Indeed it has been
decided that such matter is superfluous, and therefore it is just as if
the heir had been absolutely appointed.

\(10) An impossible condition in appointments and legacies, as well as
in trusts and bequests of freedom, is considered as not written.

\(11) Where several conditions are appended to an appointment if they
are united as, for instance, "If this and that event should take place";
they must all be carried out; but if they appear separately, for
example, "If this, or that event should take place"; it is sufficient if
any of them be observed.

\(12) Persons whom the testator has never seen may be appointed his
heirs; for instance, where he appoints his brother's sons resident in a
foreign country, he not knowing who they are; for the ignorance of the
testator does not render their appointment void.

^1^ It was necessary that the estate, or as, should be divided in such a
way that there would be no remainder, for if there was, the heir-at-law
would be entitled to it, and the deceased would then die partly testate
and partly intestate, which, as stated above, was illegal, and in direct
violation of the general rule: "*Nemo pro parte testatus; et pro parte
intestatus decidere potest.*" The meaning of the term as was a pound. It
was divided into twelve ounces or *unciÃ¦*, and this mode of computation
was applied to estates as a matter of convenience. Â— ED.

TITLE XV. CONCERNING GENERAL SUBSTITUTION.

Anyone may establish several degrees of heirs in his will, for example:
"If So-and-So will not be my heir, let So-and-So by my heir", and thus a
testator can make such substitutions as he desires, and finally, as a
last resource, appoint a slave his necessary heir.

\(1) Several persons can be substituted in the place of one, or one in
the place of several, or one for each, or the heirs who are appointed
reciprocally for one another.

\(2) Where a testator reciprocally substitutes heirs who have been left
unequal shares, and in the substitution does not specify their shares,
he is presumed to have given in the substitution the same shares which
he mentioned in the original appointment, and this the Divine Pius
stated in a Rescript.

\(3) But where another party was substituted for an appointed heir and
the latter was substituted for his co-heir, the Divine Severus and
Antoninus declared in a Rescript, "that the party who was substituted
should be entitled to both shares without distinction".

\(4) If anyone should appoint a slave belonging to another his heir,
under the impression that he is independent, and should then substitute
MÃ¦vius for him, provided he did not become his heir and the said slave
enters upon the estate by the order of his master, MÃ¦vius shall be
permitted to have half of it; for the words, "If he does not become the
heir", where the testator knows the party to be subject to the authority
of another, are understood to mean: "If he should neither become heir
himself nor cause another to do so"; while, in the case where he thinks
someone is independent they signify, "If he does not obtain the estate
for himself or for someone to whose authority he may subsequently be
subjected"; and this interpretation Tiberius CÃ¦sar established in the
case of his slave Parthenius.

TITLE XVI. CONCERNING THE SUBSTITUTION OF MINORS.

Anyone can make substitutions for his minor children who have not
reached puberty, not only in the manner We have stated above; that is,
if they do not become his heirs some other party may be his heir; but,
in addition to this, in such a way that if they do become his heirs and
die before attaining puberty, someone else can become their heir; as,
for instance, if anyone were to make use of the following language, "Let
Titius, my son, be my heir, and if my son does not become my heir, or if
he does, and dies before he comes into his own tutelage, (that is before
he arrives at puberty) then let Seius be my heir". In this case if the
son does not become the heir, then the substitute becomes the heir of
the father; but if the son becomes his heir and dies before reaching
puberty, the substitute becomes the heir of the son himself; for it has
been established by custom that when parties are of such

an age that they cannot make a will for themselves their parents may
make one for them.

\(1) Induced by this doctrine We have inserted a Constitution into Our
Code by which it is provided that where any persons have children,
grandchildren, or great-grandchildren of either sex or any age, who are
mentally weak, they may be permitted, on the principle of pupillary
substitution, to substitute certain persons for them, even though they
may have arrived at puberty. If, however, they recover their senses,
this substitution is void, and this also resembles pupillary
substitution in that it becomes void as soon as the minor grows up.

\(2) Therefore, in pupillary substitution in the manner aforesaid, there
are, as it were, two wills, one of the father, the other of the son;
just as if the son himself had appointed an heir, or, at all events,
there is one will, relating to two matters, that is to two estates.

\(3) But if anyone is so timid as to fear that his son, being still a
minor, may be liable to treachery after his death, because another
person was openly substituted for him; he should make the general
substitution openly and in the first part of his will, but insert
separately in the latter part of it the other substitution, by which the
substitute is called to the inheritance where the minor becomes the heir
and dies before reaching puberty; and he should seal up that part with a
separate thread and wax, and provide in the first part of said will that
the latter part shall not be opened while the son is alive and under
puberty. It is evident, however, that a substitution for a child under
puberty is none the less valid if written on the same tablet in which he
is appointed heir, although it may be dangerous for the minor.

\(4) Parents can not only substitute for their children who have not
reached puberty and whom they have appointed their heirs, so that if
they become their heirs and die before reaching puberty he whom they may
select shall be their heir; but they can also make substitutions for
children who have been disinherited. In this instance, therefore, if
anything has been obtained by the minor from estates, legacies, or the
gifts of relatives and friends, it all belongs to the substitute. What
We have stated with reference to the substitution of children who have
not reached puberty, whether they have been appointed heirs or
disinherited, We understand to be also applicable to posthumous
children.

\(5) No one, however, can make a will for his children unless he also
makes one for himself; for a will relating to minors is a part and
sequel of the paternal will, to such an extent that if the latter is not
valid, the will of the son will not be valid either.

\(6) Substitution can be made for each child separately, or for the one
who dies last without having reached puberty; for each separately, if
the testator desires that none of them shall die intestate; for the last
survivor, if he wishes that the right of legal inheritance shall be
preserved intact among them.

\(7) Substitution is made specifically, for a child who has not reached
puberty as, for instance: "Let Titius be my heir", or generally, as:
"Let anyone be my heir"; by which words, where the child dies before
reaching puberty those are appointed substitutes who have

both been appointed and have become heirs, which they do in proportion
to their respective shares in their father's estate.

\(8) Substitution can thus be made for a male up to the age of fourteen
years, for a female up to the age of twelve; but if made after this the
substitution is void.

\(9) Where a stranger or a son who has arrived at puberty is appointed
an heir, no one can make a substitution for him in such a manner that if
he becomes an heir and dies within a designated time, someone else will
become his heir; for the testator is only allowed to bind him by a trust
to surrender all or a portion of the estate to the other, and what this
right is We shall state in its proper place.

TITLE XVII. IN WHAT WAYS WILLS ARE RENDERED INVALID.

A will properly made is valid until it is broken, or becomes of no

effect.

\(1) A will is broken when the will itself is vitiated, although the
condition of the testator may remain unaltered; for if anyone after
having made a will should adopt a son, either one who is his own master
by authority of the Emperor, or one who is under parental control, by
order of the PrÃ¦tor, in accordance with Our Constitution; his will is
broken by the *quasi-agnation *of a proper heir.

\(2) A former will is broken by a later one legally executed, and it
makes no difference whether anyone becomes an heir under the later one
or not; the only thing to be considered is whether in any event there
could have been an heir. Therefore, if anyone refuses to be the heir,
and dies even during the lifetime of the testator, or after his death
and before he enters upon the estate, or does not fulfill some condition
under which he was appointed heir, under these circumstances the head of
the family dies intestate; for the first will is not valid having been
broken by the second one, and the latter equally is without effect
because by it no one becomes the heir.

\(3) But where anyone, after having legally executed a will, makes
another also with all proper formalities, the Divine Severus and
Antoninus stated in a Rescript that the first will was revoked, even
though the testator had appointed an heir only to certain property by
the second will. We have ordered the words of this Constitution to be
inserted because there is another matter expressed therein. "The
Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Cocceius Campanus. There is no doubt
that a second will, even though the heir is mentioned in it only with
respect to certain property, is valid in law just as if no such mention
of property had been made; but the heir thus appointed shall be bound to
be content with the property given him or with the fourth portion
authorized by the *Lex Falcidia*, and must surrender the estate to those
mentioned in the first will, on account of the words inserted in the
second by which it is stated that the first will shall remain valid".
Hence a will can be broken in this manner.

\(4) Wills properly executed are rendered void in another way, for
instance, where the testator suffers a loss of civil rights; and We have
explained in the First Book how this takes place.

\(5) In this instance We declare that wills become of no effect and that
also those are of no effect which are broken; although, on the other
hand, those which have been broken are also void, and such as are not
legally executed are void from the beginning; and those likewise which
have been regularly executed and have subsequently become of no effect
on account of a loss of civil rights, We can, nevertheless, designate as
broken. But as it is certainly more convenient to distinguish particular
instances by particular names, some are said to have been illegally
executed, and some to have been broken or to have become of no effect,
although they have been executed in accordance with the law.

\(6) Wills which have been properly executed in the first place and have
afterwards become invalid through a forfeiture of civil rights are not
entirely worthless; for if they are sealed with the seals of seven
witnesses the appointed heir can claim possession of the estate
according to the terms of the will. If the deceased was a Roman citizen,
and his own master at the time of his death; for where a will becomes of
no effect because the testator lost his citizenship or his liberty, or
because he allowed himself to be adopted and at the time of his death
was under the control of his adoptive father, the appointed heir cannot
in this instance demand possession of the estate in accordance with the
terms of the will.

\(7) A will cannot be rendered void because the testator afterwards was
unwilling that it should remain valid; and this rule is applicable where
anyone, after having made one will begins to make another, but having
been prevented by death, or because he changed his mind, did not finish
it; for, as was stated in an address of the Divine Pertinax the first
will, if properly executed, would not become inoperative unless the
subsequent one had been legally drawn up and perfected, for an
unfinished will is without doubt worthless.

\(8) In the same address he stated, "That he would not accept an
inheritance from a party who made the Emperor his heir on account of an
action-at-law; nor would he legalize an instrument which was not
properly executed in which he himself was appointed heir for the purpose
of making it good; nor would he accept the title of heir bestowed upon
him verbally; nor receive anything by a document which lacked the
sanction of legal authority". The Divine Severus and Antoninus issued
many Rescripts in compliance with these utterances, "For although," as
they said, "We are exempt from the operation of the laws, nevertheless,
We live under the laws".

TITLE XVIII. CONCERNING AN INOFFICIOUS WILL.

As parents frequently disinherit, or pass over their children without
cause, it has become the practice for children who complain of be-

ing unjustly disinherited or passed over, to be permitted to bring an
action *de inofficioso testamento*, on the assumption that the parties
were not of sound mind when they executed the will. This statement,
however, does not imply that the party was actually insane, but that he
made his will in compliance with the law but not in accordance with the
obligation of affection; for if he was actually insane his will is void.

\(1) Not only are children allowed to bring the charge that the will of
their parents is inofficious, but also parents can do this in the case
of their children; a sister and a brother, likewise, by certain Imperial
Constitutions, are preferred to testamentary heirs if the latter are
infamous, and for this reason they cannot proceed against all heirs.
Relatives further removed than brothers and sisters can, in no way,
either bring suit, or if they do so, successfully prosecute it.

\(2) Both natural and adopted children, as classified by Our
Constitution, can only bring an action *de inofficioso testamento* when
they can reach the property of the deceased by no other legal means; for
those who can acquire the entire estate or a portion of the same by any
other lawful method cannot bring an action *de inofficioso*. Posthumous
children can also bring such an action if they cannot reach the property
by any other legal method.

\(3) These measures are applicable where absolutely nothing has been
left them by the testator, which provision, one of Our Constitutions has
introduced through reverence for nature. Where, however, any share
whatever of the estate or anything at all has been left to the parties,
a complaint of inofficiousness does not lie; and what is lacking to them
must be made good to the amount of the fourth part of their legitimate
share, and this is the case even though the testator did not direct that
this amount should be made up according to the estimate of a reliable
citizen.

\(4) Even though a guardian may in the name of the ward of whose
business he had charge have accepted a legacy bequeathed by the will of
his father, nothing being left to the guardian himself by his father, he
can, nevertheless, attack his father's will as being inofficious.

\(5) On the other hand, if he brings an action *de inofficioso* in the
name of his ward to whom nothing was left, and is beaten, he himself
does not lose a legacy left him by the same will.

\(6) Therefore, a party must be entitled to a fourth part in order not
to be able to bring an action *de inofficioso testamento*, either by
hereditary right, or by way of a legacy or trust, or by a *donatio
mortis causa* of the fourth being bestowed upon him, or by a *donatio
inter vivos*, but only in those instances mentioned by Our Constitution,
or under other circumstances set forth in other Constitutions.

\(7) But where We mention a fourth, it must be understood that whether
there be one, or several parties who can bring an action *de officioso
testamento*, a fourth is to be given them so as to be distributed *pro
rata*, that is to say a fourth of his full share to each individual.

TITLE XIX. CONCERNING THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF HEIRS.

Heirs are called either necessary, or proper and necessary, or foreign.

\(1) A necessary heir is a slave appointed an heir, and he is so called
because, whether he is willing or unwilling, in every instance after the
death of the testator he immediately becomes free, and a necessary heir.
Wherefore those who have a suspicion that they are insolvent usually
appoint one of their slaves the heir, in the first, second, or a more
distant degree; so that, if their creditors cannot be satisfied, the
property can be taken possession of by them and either sold or divided
among them as if it belonged to the heir rather than to the testator
himself. As a recompense for this inconvenience, however, he enjoys the
advantage that any property that he acquires for himself after the death
of his patron is reserved for his own benefit; and even though the
assets may not be sufficient to pay the creditors of the deceased,
whatever he may have acquired for himself is not subject to sale on this
account.

\(2) Proper and necessary heirs are, for instance, a son or a daughter,
a grandson or a granddaughter by a son, and other descendants in
succession, provided they are under the control of the deceased. But in
order to constitute a grandson or a granddaughter proper heirs, it is
not sufficient for them to have been under the control of their
grandfather at the time of his death, but it is necessary that their
father should have ceased to be a proper heir during the lifetime of his
father, having been freed from his control either by death or in some
other manner; for then the grandson or granddaughter succeeds in the
place of his or her father.

Proper heirs are so called because they are heirs of the house and even
during the lifetime of their father they are, to a certain extent,
considered its owners; and therefore, if anyone dies intestate, the
first rank in the succession belongs to the children. They are styled
necessary heirs because they become heirs in every instance whether they
are willing or unwilling, or whether they take by intestacy or under a
will; but the PrÃ¦tor allows them to reject the estate if they wish to do
so; in order that the property may, in like manner, be taken possession
of by creditors as that of their ascendant rather than as belonging to
them.

\(3) Others who are not subject to the control of a testator are called
foreign heirs. Thus, even Our children who are not under Our authority,
if considered heirs by Us, are considered foreign heirs. For this reason
those who are appointed heirs by a mother are in the same category,
because women do not have control of their children. A slave also who
has been appointed heir by his master, and manumitted by him after the
execution of his will, is included in the same class.

\(4) The following rule with reference to foreign heirs is in force,
namely; that there must be competency to take under the will whether
they themselves, or others who are under their authority, are ap-

pointed heirs; and this must be applicable at two different times, that
is when the will is executed so that the appointment may stand; and also
at the death of the testator, in order that it may take effect. In
addition to this whenever an heir enters upon an estate competency to
take under the will must also exist, whether he be appointed absolutely
or under some condition; for the right of the heir must be carefully
examined at the time when he acquires the estate. A change affecting the
right does not prejudice the heir if it takes place in the interval
between the execution of the will and the death of the testator, or the
carrying out of the condition of appointment; for the reason, as We have
already stated, that the three periods aforesaid are those to be

considered.

Not only is a person deemed competent if he can make a will, but also if
he himself can take under the will of another or acquire the estate for
a third party, even though he cannot make a will. For this reason an
insane person, one who is dumb, a posthumous child, an infant, a son
under paternal authority, and a slave belonging to another, are said to
possess competency, for even though they cannot make a will, still, they
can acquire property by a will either for themselves, or for others.

\(5) Foreign heirs have also the right to deliberate as to whether they
will enter on the estate or not, but if one who has the power to refuse
meddles with the property of the estate: or if a foreign heir who is
permitted to deliberate as to accepting the same enters upon it, he has
not afterwards the right to relinquish it unless he is under twenty-five
years of age; for as the Pra3tor comes to the relief of persons of this
age in all other instances where they have been deceived, so he also
does if they have rashly accepted an injurious inheritance.

\(6) It must be borne in mind, however, that the Divine Hadrian granted
the same indulgence to a person over twenty-five years of age when after
he had entered upon an estate a large debt came to light, whose
existence was not known at the time the estate was entered upon. This
Hadrian granted as a particular favor to an individual; the Divine
Gordian, however, subsequently extended it, but only to include
soldiers. Now We, in our benevolence, have granted this privilege to all
persons even when subject to Our Imperial authority, and have drawn up a
Constitution as just as it is excellent; and if men observe the tenor of
the same they are permitted to enter upon an estate and be liable for
only so much as the property of the estate is worth; and under such
conditions the aid of deliberation does not become necessary for them,
unless they neglect to observe the provisions of Our Constitution, and
deciding to deliberate, prefer to subject themselves to the ancient risk
of entering upon the estate.

\(7) Moreover, a foreign heir, whether appointed by will or called to
legal inheritance by intestacy, can become an heir either by acting as
such, or by merely expressing a desire to accept the estate. Anyone is
considered to act as heir if he uses the property of the estate as an
heir either by selling it, or by cultivating or leasing land; or if in
any way by deeds or words he manifests his wish to enter upon the
estate;

provided that he knows that the party whose property he handles as heir
has died either testate or intestate, and that he himself is his heir,
since to act as heir is the same as to act as owner; for the ancients
designated heirs as owners. But just as a foreign heir becomes such by
his mere will, so by a contrary resolution he is at once excluded from
the inheritance. There is nothing which prohibits a person who is dumb
or deaf, who was either born so or became so subsequently, from acting
as heir and acquiring an estate for himself, if he only understands what
is done.

TITLE XX. CONCERNING LEGACIES.

Let Us next examine legacies. This part of the law appears in fact to be
outside the subject now under consideration, for we are discussing the
legal measures by means of which property is acquired by Us as a whole;
but since We have spoken of all questions concerning wills and heirs
appointed by will, this matter of law may, not without reason, be
treated of in the next place.

\(1) A legacy, therefore, is a certain gift left by a party who is dead.

\(2) Formerly, in fact, there were four kinds of legacies, namely, *per
vindicationem, per damnationem, sinendi modo*, and *per prÃ¦ceptionem;*
particular terms being devoted to each kind of legacy by which the
different classes were indicated. But by the Constitutions of preceding
Emperors formality of this kind in the use of words has been entirely
abolished; and one of Our Constitutions Â— to which We have devoted much
deliberation, being desirous that the intentions of deceased persons
should receive greater consideration, and being disposed to favor their
intentions rather than their words Â— have provided that all legacies
should be of one nature, and no matter what the words may be by means of
which anything is bequeathed, the legatee, may institute proceedings to
recover it either by a personal action, a real, or an hypothecary one.
The carefully weighed arrangement of this Constitution may be readily
comprehended by an examination of its contents.

\(3) We did not think, however, that We ought to stop at the said
Constitution, for when We found that in ancient times legacies were
strictly limited, and that greater indulgence was shown to trusts
because they proceed more directly from the desires of the deceased; We
have deemed it necessary to place all legacies on the same footing with
trusts, so that no difference may exist between them, but whatever is
lacking in legacies may be supplied from their nature as trusts; and the
nature of trusts may be benefited by anything advantageous which
attaches to legacies. But that We may not introduce any difficulty for
young men who are studying the first principles of the law by explaining
these matters together, We have deemed it advisable to now first discuss
legacies, and afterwards trusts, so that they may become familiar with
the nature of both these subjects, and may with keener ears,

by means of the information afforded, readily comprehend the mingling of
the two.

\(4) A testator can not only bequeath his own property or that of his
heir, but also what belongs to others; and, under such circumstances,
his heir is compelled to purchase and deliver it, or if he cannot
purchase it pay its appraised value. But if the property is of such a
character that it cannot be an object of commerce, the heir shall not be
required to pay its value; as, for instance, if anyone bequeaths the
*Campus Martius*, basilicas, temples, or anything destined for public
use; as such a legacy is of no importance.

When We stated that the property of another could be bequeathed, it must
be understood to mean if the defunct knew that it belonged to someone
else, and not if he was merely ignorant of the fact; for perhaps if he
had known that it belonged to someone else he would not have bequeathed
it. With reference to this, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript: "It is
also true that the party who brings the suit, that is to say the
legatee, is obliged to prove that the deceased knew that he was
bequeathing the property of another, but the heir is not bound to prove
that he was ignorant that it belonged to some one else, for the
necessity of proof is always incumbent on the party who brings the
action".

\(5) If anyone bequeaths property which has been encumbered to a
creditor, the heir is obliged to redeem it; and, in this instance also
the same rule applies as with respect to the property of another, so
that the heir is only obliged to redeem it in case the deceased knew
that the property was pledged; and this the Divine Severus and Antoninus
published in a Rescript. If, however, the deceased wished the legatee to
redeem the property and expressed himself to that effect, the heir is
not compelled to redeem it.

\(6) Where property belonging to another party is bequeathed, and the
legatee becomes the owner of the same during the lifetime of the
testator; than if he obtained it by purchase he can recover his price by
an action based on the will; but if he obtained it by a lucrative title,
as for instance, by gift, or by any other similar title he cannot bring
suit, for it has been decided that two lucrative titles to the same
property cannot be united in the same person. According to this rule,
where the same property is due to the same person by two wills, it must
be determined whether he acquired it or its value under the first will;
for if he obtained the property, he cannot bring an action because he
already possesses it by a lucrative title, but if he has obtained its
value, he can bring the action.

\(7) Property which does not, as yet, in the nature of things exist can
be legally bequeathed, if it afterwards comes into existence; as, for
instance, crops which are to be produced on certain land, or a child to
be born of a female slave.

\(8) If the same property is bequeathed to two persons either conjointly
or disjointly, and both of them accept the legacy, it shall be divided
between them; and if one of them fails to accept it, either because he
rejects the legacy, or dies during the lifetime of the testator,

or does not take it for some other reason, the entire legacy belongs to
his co-legatee.

A legacy is bequeathed conjointly, where, for instance, anyone says: "I
give and bequeath the slave Stichus to Titius and Seius"; disjointly,
where the following words are used, "I give and bequeath the slave
Stichus to Titius; I give and bequeath Stichus to Seius"; and even if he
says plainly that he gives, "the same slave Stichus", the legacy is
understood to be disjointly bequeathed.

\(9) Where land belonging to another is left as a legacy, and the
legatee buys the ownership of the same less the usufruct, and the
usufruct comes to him and he afterwards brings suit under the will,
Julianus says that his suit and claim for the land are just because the
usufruct is considered in his petition as a servitude; and it is the
duty of the judge to order that the value of the property be paid after
deducting the usufruct.

\(10) But where anyone bequeaths to a legatee the property of the
latter, the legacy is void because what is a person's individual
property cannot be made his any more his own; and even though he may
alienate it, neither the property nor its value is due to him.

\(11) If anyone bequeaths his own property thinking that it belongs to
another, the legacy will be valid, for what actually exists is of
greater value than that merely based upon opinion; but if he thought
that the property belonged to the legatee, the legacy is also valid,
because the will of the deceased can be carried out.

\(12) If a testator bequeaths his property and afterwards alienates it,
Celsus holds that if he did not sell it with the intention of revoking
the bequest, it is still good; and this opinion the Divine Severus and
Antoninus confirmed by a Rescript. They also established by another
Rescript that anyone who, after he had made his will, encumbered certain
land which he had bequeathed, did not by doing so revoke the legacy; and
for that reason the legatee could bring suit against the heir to have
the land redeemed from the creditor. But where any person alienates part
of the property bequeathed, the part which is not alienated is certainly
due, and that which is alienated is only due when this was done without
the intent to revoke the legacy.

\(13) If anyone bequeaths a release from his debt to his debtor, the
legacy is valid, and the heir of the creditor cannot demand payment
either from the debtor himself, his heir, or anyone who occupies the
place of his heir; but an action can be brought by the debtor to compel
him to give him a release. Anyone can also order his heir not to demand
payment within a specified time.

\(14) On the other hand, if a debtor leaves to his creditor what he owes
him, the legacy is void, if it does not include any more than the debt,
for the reason that he gains nothing more by the legacy. But if he
absolutely bequeaths to him a debt which is due at a future time, or
under some condition, the bequest is valid on account of the
anticipation of payment; but if the time should arrive, or the condition
should be fulfilled during the life of the testator, Papinian wrote that
the legacy is nevertheless valid, because it was so in the beginning,
which

is true; for We have not adopted the opinion of those who thought that
the legacy was extinguished because a situation had arisen in which it
could not have originated.

\(15) Moreover, if a husband bequeaths to his wife her marriage-gift,
the bequest is valid because a legacy is of greater value than a suit to
recover the marriage-gift; but if he bequeaths a marriage-gift which he
has never received, the Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a
Rescript that the legacy is void if he bequeathed it in general terms;
but if a certain sum of money, or a certain object, or an instrument of
dower is mentioned in making the bequest, it will be valid.

\(16) If the property bequeathed is destroyed without the act of the
heir, the loss must be borne by the legatee; and if the slave of another
is bequeathed, and is manumitted without the act of the heir, the latter
will not be liable. But where the slave of the heir is bequeathed, and
he himself manumits him; Julianus held that the heir was liable, and
that it made no difference whether he knew, or was ignorant that the
slave had been bequeathed away from him; and also if the heir presented
the slave to another party, and he to whom he was given manumitted him,
the heir will be liable, even though he was ignorant of the fact that
the slave had been bequeathed away from him.

\(17) Where anyone bequeaths his female slaves and their children, the
children belong to the legatee, even though the slaves die. The same
rule applies where ordinary slaves are bequeathed with their own slaves,
and even though the ordinary slaves may be dead, still the under-slaves
pass as a legacy. But if a slave is bequeathed along with his
*peculium*, the bequest of the *peculium* is extinguished by the death,
the manumission, or the alienation of the slave. The same rule applies
where land provided with implements is left, for if the land is disposed
of, the bequest of the implements is extinguished.

\(18) Where a flock is bequeathed, and afterwards but one sheep
survives, a suit can be brought for what is left. Julianus says, that
where a flock is bequeathed, even sheep which were added to it after the
will was executed form part of the legacy; for a flock is one body
composed of so many distinct head, just as a house is one body composed
of different stones joined together.

\(19) For this reason, when a house is bequeathed, any columns and
pieces of marble which have been added to it after the execution of the
will constitute a portion of the legacy.

\(20) Where *peculium* is the subject of a legacy, any addition to or
diminution of the same which takes place during the lifetime of the
testator undoubtedly is to the gain or loss of the legatee. Where,
however, a slave acquires property after the death of the testator and
before the estate is entered upon, Julianus says that when his
*peculium* is bequeathed to the slave who is manumitted, everything that
has been added before the heir entered upon the estate belongs to the
slave as legatee, because the time when the legacy vests begins at the
moment when the heir enters upon the estate; but where the *peculium* is
left to a stranger, what has been acquired is not included in the
legacy, unless

the increase was made by means of a portion of the said *peculium. *The
latter, however, does not go to the manumitted slave unless it was left
to him, although if his master manumitted him while he was living, it is
sufficient if he is not deprived of it; and this the Divine Severus and
Antoninus established by a Rescript. They also declared in another
Rescript that when his *peculium* was left to him it does not appear
that he can demand money which he has expended for the benefit of his
master. They also stated in still another Rescript, that his *peculium*
is deemed to have been bequeathed to him when he is ordered to be free
after his accounts have been rendered, and he has made good any deficit
out of his *peculium*.

\(21) All property, whether corporeal or incorporeal, can be bequeathed,
and therefore a debt owing to a deceased person can be left to anyone
else, so that the heir must transfer to the legatee his rights of
action, unless the testator while living had collected the money, for in
this case the legacy is extinguished. A legacy like the following is
also valid: "Let my heir be required to repair the house of So-and-So,
or release him from debt."

\(22) If a slave or any other kind of property is bequeathed in general
terms, the legatee has a right to make a choice unless the testator
stated otherwise.

\(23) A legacy of option, that is where the testator orders the legatee
to select one of his slaves, or some of his other property, formerly
included a condition; and therefore unless the legatee made a choice
while living, he did not transmit the legacy to his heir. By one of Our
Constitutions, however, this matter has been corrected, and permission
is given to the heir of the legatee to make a choice, although the
latter did not do so during his lifetime. And extending the doctrine
still farther, We have added the following in Our Constitutions, namely,
where there are several legatees to whom an option is given, and they do
not agree in making a choice, of there are several heirs of one legatee
and they differ with one another with respect to the choice, one wishing
to select one article, and another another; then, to prevent the legacy
from becoming invalid (which the majority of lawyers would hold it to
be, contrary to a liberal ruling) fortune must be the judge of such a
choice, and the dispute must be determined by lot; so that in making the
selection the opinion of him shall be adopted who is designated by the
lot which is cast.

\(24) Those persons alone are entitled to receive a legacy who are
legally competent to do so.

\(25) Formerly neither legacies nor trusts could be left to persons who
are uncertain, and not even a soldier could leave property to an
uncertain person, as the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript. An
uncertain person was one that the testator had in his mind without any
definite idea of his existence; as, for instance if anyone should say:
"Let my heir give such-and-such land to whoever gives his daughter in
marriage to my son". Also where property was left to those, "Who should
first be appointed Consuls after the execution of

my will", it was also considered as a legacy to an uncertain person, and
there are, indeed, many other cases of this kind.

Moreover, it was established that freedom could not be conferred upon an
uncertain person, because it had been decided that slaves should be
liberated by name. Only a certain person also could be appointed a
guardian. Property could be legally bequeathed where the description was
certain, that is to say to an uncertain person who belonged to a
definite class, as for instance: "Let my heir give such-and-such
property to the one of my living relatives who will marry my daughter".
It has been provided by certain Sacred Constitutions that legacies or
trusts left to uncertain persons and paid by mistake, cannot be
recovered.

\(26) A legacy bequeathed to a posthumous child who is a stranger
formerly was void. A posthumous child who is a stranger is one who, if
born, would not be included among the proper heirs of the testator; and
for that reason a grandson the issue of a son who had been emancipated
was formerly a posthumous stranger, so far as his grandfather was
concerned.

\(27) This matter also has not been absolutely passed over without
suitable correction, for a Constitution has been inserted into Our Code
by means of which We have amended this, not only with reference to
estates, but also as it affects legacies and trusts; and this appears
perfectly clear from the reading of the Constitution itself. But an
uncertain guardian cannot be appointed by Our Constitution, because
every man ought to provide with discernment for the guardianship of his
posterity.

\(28) Still, a posthumous stranger could formerly, and can now, be
constituted an heir; unless he is the unborn child of a woman who cannot
legally be our wife.

\(29) If a testator should make a mistake as to the name, surname, or
appellation of the legatee, if certainty exists as to the person the
legacy is valid; and the same rule applies with respect to heirs, and
justly so, for names were invented for the sake of distinguishing men,
and it makes no difference if their identity can be determined in any
other way.

\(30) The following rule of law resembles this, namely; that a legacy is
not rendered void by a false description, for example, if anyone should
state in a bequest, "I give and bequeath by born-slave Stichus"; for
although he may not have been born in his house but had been purchased,
yet if his identity as a slave be established, the legacy is valid; and
agreeably to this if the testator described him as follows: "My slave
Stichus whom I bought of Seius"; and he was purchased from someone else,
the legacy is valid if the identity of the slave is certain.

\(31) Still more does a false reason work no injury to a bequest, for
example, if anyone should say: "I give and bequeath Stichus to Titius,
because while I was absent he transacted my business"; or as follows: "I
give and bequeath Stichus to Titius, because through his efforts I was
acquitted of a capital crime"; for although Titius may never have
attended to the affairs of the testator, or the latter have been
acquitted

by his agency, the legacy, nevertheless, is valid. But the rule is not
the same where the reason was stated conditionally; for instance, in
this manner: "I give and bequeath the land to Titius if he attended to
my affairs".

\(32) The question arises as to whether We can legally make a bequest to
the slave of our heir, and it is evident that if it is made purely and
simply, it is not valid, and it makes no difference if the slave be
liberated from the control of the heir during the lifetime of the
testator; for the reason that a legacy which would be void if the
testator had died immediately after the will was executed, ought not to
be valid solely because he lived a longer time. Such a bequest, however,
is valid if made conditionally, so that we must ascertain whether when
the right vested the slave was under the control of the heir.

\(33) On the other hand, there is no doubt that a legacy can be legally
bequeathed without any condition to a master, when his slave is
appointed heir; and, again, if the testator should die immediately after
executing the will, the right to the legacy is not understood to vest in
him who is the heir; since the estate has been separated from the
legacy, and another heir can be created through that slave, if he be
transferred to the control of the other before he enters upon the estate
by the order by his master, or he himself becomes the heir through being
manumitted; in which case the legacy is operative; but if he remains in
the same condition, and enters upon the estate by order of a legatee,
the legacy vanishes.

\(34) A legacy formerly was void if bequeathed before the appointment of
the heir; evidently because wills derive their force from the
appointment of heirs; and on this account the appointment of the heir is
considered as it were the head and foundation of the entire will. On the
same principle, a bequest of freedom could not be made before the
appointment of the heir. But because We consider it unreasonable to
follow the order of the writing; (which the ancients themselves deemed
worthy of censure) and pay no attention to the wishes of the testator;
We have corrected this defect by one of Our Constitutions; so that it is
now permissible for anyone to make a bequest before the appointment of
an heir, or between the appointments of heirs, and also to make a grant
of freedom which is regarded with much greater force.

\(35) In like manner a legacy to be effective after the death of the
heir or legatee formerly was void, as if anyone should say: "I give and
bequeath when my heir is dead", and also, "The day before my heir or
legatee shall die". We have, however, amended this in the same way, by
giving equal validity to legacies of this kind as to trusts; so that the
rules governing legacies may not in this instance be more severe than
those regulating trusts.

\(36) To bestow legacies, take them away, or transfer them by way of
penalty was also void. A legacy is deemed to be bestowed by way of
penalty when it is left to compel the heir to perform, or not to perform
some act, for example, when anyone writes as follows: "If my heir should
give his daughter in marriage to Titius, (or, on the other

hand, if he should not do so) let him pay ten *aurei* to Seius"; or if
he should say "If my heir alienates my slave Stichus, (or, on the other
hand, if he does not alienate him) let him pay Titius ten *aurei*". And
this rule was observed to such an extent that it was set forth in many
Imperial Constitutions that not even the Emperor himself could accept
anything bequeathed to him by way of penalty.

Nor were legacies of this kind valid under the will of a soldier,
although the other intentions of soldiers when they executed their wills
were scrupulously observed. It was also established that freedom could
not be granted by way of penalty. Sabinus was of the opinion that
another heir could not be added by way of penalty, for instance, if
anyone should say: "Let Titius be my heir, but if Titius gives my
daughter in marriage to Seius, let Seius also be my heir"; for it did
not matter, in what way force was brought to bear upon Titius, whether
by the gift of a legacy of the addition of a co-heir. But We do not
sanction such nicety, and We have decreed generally that whatever
property is left, even though it may have been bequeathed, revoked, or
transferred to other persons by way of penalty, shall differ in no
respect from other legacies which have been given, revoked or
transferred; those cases being excepted where the conditions are
impossible, forbidden by law, or are otherwise worthy of disapproval;
for testamentary dispositions of this description are not permitted by
the procedure of Our time.

TITLE XXI. CONCERNING THE REVOCATION OF LEGACIES.

The revocation of legacies is valid, whether it be made in the will
itself or in a codicil, or whether it is made in contrary terms, as, for
instance, where anyone has bestowed a legacy by the words: "I give and
bequeath"; and it is revoked by saying, "I do not give and bequeath", or
by words that are not contrary, that is to say by any words whatsoever.

\(1) A legacy may also be transferred from one person to another, for
instance, where anyone says: "I give and bequeath to Seius the slave
Stichus whom I bequeathed to Titius", whether he do this in the same
will or in a codicil; and in this case the legacy is presumed to be at
once taken from Titius and bestowed upon Seius.

TITLE XXII. CONCERNING THE LEX FALCIDIA.

It remains for us to treat of the *Lex Falcidia*, by which restrictions
have been recently placed upon legacies; for as formerly, by a law of
the Twelve Tables, there was unlimited power of bequeathing property, so
that a person could dispose of his entire estate by means of legacies;
(since by this law it was provided that, "According as he bequeathed his
property so let the right be"), it afterwards seemed

proper to limit this liberty of bequeathing; and this was done for the
sake of the testators themselves, for the reason that men frequently
died intestate, and those who were appointed heirs declined to enter
upon an estate from which little or no profit was to be obtained. And
when after this the *Lex Furia* and the *Lex Voconia* were enacted,
neither of which seemed to be sufficient for the accomplishment of the
purpose, the *Lex Falcidia* was ultimately passed, by which it was
provided that no man could bequeath in legacies more than three-fourths
of his entire estate, so that if one or more heirs were appointed, the
fourth part would remain for him or them.

\(1) The question has been raised where two heirs have been appointed,
as, for instance Titius and Seius, and the share of Titius was entirely
exhausted, or burdened beyond measure by legacies specifically charged
upon him, while no legacies whatever were charged upon Seius, or only
such as diminished his share one-half; whether Titius should be
prevented from reserving anything out of the legacies charged upon him
because Seius had the fourth part, or more, of the entire estate; and it
was determined that he might hold the fourth part of his own share, for
the rule of the *Lex Falcidia *applies to heirs separately.

\(2) The value of an estate to which the rule of the *Lex Falcidia *is
applicable is computed at the time of death. If, therefore, for example,
he who has an estate worth a hundred *aurei* bestows the same amount in
legacies, no benefit results to the legatees, if before the estate is
entered upon so large an addition is made to it by the acquisitions of
slaves, or by the birth of children of female slaves, or by the increase
of cattle, that the heir would have the fourth part of the estate left
after having paid out a hundred *aurei* in legacies, but it,
nevertheless, is requisite that a fourth part should be deducted from
the said legacies.

On the other hand, if the testator should bestow seventy-five *aurei *in
legacies, and before the estate is entered upon, it should be so
diminished by fire, by shipwreck, or by the death of slaves, that more
than the value of seventy-five *aurei*, or even less, is left; the
legacies shall be due as they stand. Nor is this injurious to the heir,
for he has the right not to enter upon the estate; which renders it
necessary for the legatees to compromise with him for a certain portion,
lest they do not obtain anything by the will being abandoned.

\(3) When the value of the estate is estimated under the *Lex Falcidia,
*the debts, funeral expenses, and value of manumitted slaves are first
deducted, and then a distribution of the balance of the estate is made,
so that a fourth part of the same remains for the heirs, and the other
three-fourths are divided among the legatees in proportion to the share
left to each one of them. Therefore, if we suppose four hundred *aurei*
to have been bequeathed, and the value of the estate out of which the
legacies are to be paid to be four hundred *aurei*, one-fourth must be
taken from each legatee; but if we suppose the legacies to amount to
three hundred and fifty an eighth must be taken from them. If the
testator bestowed five hundred *aurei *in legacies, in the first

place a fifth and afterwards a fourth, must be deducted; for what is
over and above the value of the property must first be reserved, and
then the amount to which the heir is entitled.

TITLE XXIII. CONCERNING TRUST ESTATES.

Let Us now pass to trusts, and in the first place We shall treat of
trust estates.

\(1) It must be borne in mind that, in early times, trusts had no force
because no one, if he was unwilling, was compelled to do what he was
only requested to perform; for if persons left estates or legacies to
those to whom they could not legally do so, they committed them to the
good faith of the parties qualified to take under the will; and for this
reason they were designated trusts, because they were founded upon no
legal obligation but only on the honor of those who were asked to see
that they were executed. Subsequently the Divine Augustus time and
again, being inclined to favor certain persons, or because the party
requested to fulfill the trust was having been appealed to for the
safety of the Emperor, or on account of some well known act of perfidy,
ordered the consuls to exert their authority. For the reason that this
seemed to be just and popular, it was gradually converted into a regular
jurisdiction; and trusts came into such general favor that, a special
PrÃ¦tor, who was called *Fideicommissarius*, ultimately was appointed to
interpret the law of trusts.

\(2) In the first place then, it should be noted that an heir must be
duly appointed by will, to whose good faith shall be committed the
delivery of the estate to the other party; otherwise, the will is
inoperative because no heir has been properly appointed by it.
Therefore, when anyone has written: "Let Lucius Titius be my heir"; he
can add, "I ask you, Lucius Titius, that as soon as you can enter upon
my estate you will surrender and transfer it to Gaius Seius". Anyone may
also ask his heir to surrender a part of the estate; and he is at
liberty to leave a trust, either absolutely, or under some condition, or
to date from a certain day.

\(3) After an estate has been transferred, he who did so still remains
the heir, while he who receives it was in former times in some instances
considered as an heir, and in others as a legatee.

\(4) A Decree of the Senate was enacted in the time of Nero, while
Trebellius Maximus and AnnÃ¦us Seneca were Consuls, by which it was
provided that where an estate was transferred on account of a trust, all
actions which by the Civil Law would lie for the heir and against him,
should be granted for and against him to whom the estate was transferred
in compliance with the terms of the trust. After the enactment of this
decree, the PrÃ¦tor began to allow equitable actions both for and against
him who had obtained the estate, just as could be done for and against
an heir.

\(5) But, as regularly appointed heirs when requested in general terms
to surrender the entire estate, or nearly all of it, declined to en-

ter upon the same, because little or no profit accrued to them
therefrom, and on this account the trust was extinguished; afterwards,
in the time of Vespasian Augustus, while Pegasus and Pusio were Consuls,
the Senate decreed that he who was requested to transfer an estate
should likewise be permitted to retain the fourth part of the same, just
as the right to do so in the case of legacies is granted by the *Lex
Falcidia*. The same retention was also permitted in the case of separate
property which was left in trust. After the Decree of the Senate was
enacted, the heir himself sustained the burdens of the estate; while he
who received the remainder of it by virtue of the trust occupied the
place of a partial legatee, that is to say, of a legatee to whom a
portion of the property was bequeathed; which kind of legacy is called a
division from the fact that the legatee divided the estate with the
heir. For which reason the same stipulations which were usually agreed
upon by the heir and the partial legatee, were also agreed upon by the
party who obtained the estate under the trust and the heir; that is to
say, that the profit and loss arising from the estate should be divided
between them in proportion to their respective shares.

\(6) Therefore, if the heir should be requested to transfer not more
than three-fourths of the estate, then the transfer of the same was made
in compliance with the Trebellian Decree, and actions relating to the
estate were formerly permitted in proportion to their respective shares;
against the heir by the Civil Law, and against the party who received
the estate by the Trebellian Decree as if against an heir.

But where he was required to deliver more than three-fourths, or even
the entire estate, the case was then governed by the Pegasian Decree,
and the heir who at once entered upon the estate Â— if he acted
voluntarily, whether he retained the fourth part of the same or was
unwilling to do so Â— himself sustained all the burdens of the estate;
but where the fourth part was retained, stipulations like those
designated *partis et pro parte *were formerly entered into, as between
a partial legatee and an heir; but if the heir transferred the entire
estate, stipulations of an estate which had been bought and sold were
formerly entered into.

Where, however, the appointed heir refuses to enter upon the estate
because he says that he thinks that it will be detrimental to him, it is
provided by the Pegasian Decree that when requested by the party to whom
he was directed to transfer it, he shall by order of the PrÃ¦tor enter
upon and transfer the estate; and that actions are also to be granted in
favor of and against the beneficiary of the estate, as provided by the
Trebellian Decree. Under these circumstances no stipulations are
required, for the reason that at the same time security is given to him
who has delivered the estate, and actions having reference to it are
transferred for and against the party who received the same; both
decrees of the Senate being concurrently applicable in this instance.

\(7) But since the stipulations derived from the Pegasian Decree were
displeasing even to the ancient jurists, and Papinian, that man of
eminent genius, declares that in some cases they are captious; and as

simplicity rather than complexity in the laws seems to Us to be
desirable; therefore, the various points of resemblance and difference
in both decrees having been brought to Our notice, We have ordered that
the Pegasian Decree, which was the more recent one, shall be repealed,
and that general authority shall be granted to the Trebellian Decree; so
that estates in trust shall be transferred in compliance with its
provisions, whether the heir, by the wish of the testator retains a
fourth, or more, or less, or absolutely nothing; so that when nothing or
less than a quarter remain to him, he shall be permitted by Our sanction
to reserve either the quarter or whatever portion is lacking, or if it
has been paid to demand that it be surrendered to him; and that actions
shall lie against both the heir and the party taking under the trust,
according to their respective shares, as under the Trebellian Decree.

Where, however, the heir voluntarily transfers the entire estate, all
actions relating to it will lie for the benefit of the party taking
under the trust, as well as against him.

Moreover, with reference to the principal points of the Pegasian Decree,
namely, that when the appointed heir declined to enter upon the estate
which was given him he might be forced to deliver the whole of it to the
beneficiary of the trust if the latter wished this to be done; and that
all actions should be transferred to him and against him; this also We
have inserted in the Trebellian Decree Â— so that by the latter alone the
necessity is imposed upon the heir if he declines to enter upon the
estate, and the beneficiary of the trust wishes that the estate shall be
delivered over to himself Â— in such a way that neither profit nor loss
shall affect the heir.

\(8) Moreover, it does not matter whether anyone appointed an heir to
the entire estate be asked to transfer it all or only a portion of the
same, or whether an heir appointed to a part is asked to transfer all
that part or only a portion of it; for, under these circumstances, We
direct the same rule to be observed which We have prescribed with
reference to the transfer of the entire estate.

\(9) Where anyone is asked to transfer an estate where some single thing
is deducted or reserved which includes the fourth part, as, for
instance, a tract of land, or anything else; the transfer shall be made,
in like manner, in conformity with the Trebellian Decree; just as would
have been the case if the party had been requested to retain a fourth
part and surrender the balance of the estate. There is this distinction,
however, that in the one instance, that is to say when the estate is
delivered after a certain part of it has been deducted or reserved, the
actions are entirely transferred under the Decree of the Senate, and the
property which remains in possession of the heir will be exempt from any
burden derived from the estate, just as if it had been acquired by a
legacy; but in the other instance, that is when the heir is requested to
retain a fourth part and deliver the remainder of the estate, and does
this, the actions are divided, and are transferred in the proportion of
three-quarters to the beneficiary of the trust, and one-quarter of the
same to the heir.

Even if the heir is asked to surrender the estate after having deducted
or reserved some specified property in which the greater part

of the estate is included, the actions are equally transferred as a
whole, and he to whom the estate is to be transferred should decide
whether or not it is to his advantage for this to be done. The same
rules certainly are applicable when an heir is requested to transfer the
estate and two or more articles have been deducted or reserved; and the
same principle applies where an heir is requested to deliver the estate
after having deducted or reserved a certain sum of money which amounts
to the fourth or even to a greater portion of the same.

What We have stated concerning a person appointed heir to the entire
estate We also render applicable to him who has been appointed heir to
only a part of it.

\(10) Moreover, anyone who is about to die intestate may request him to
whom he knows his property will belong either by the Civil or the
PrÃ¦torian Law, to deliver to some person his entire estate or a part of
it, or any designated article, as, for instance, a tract of land, a
slave, or a sum of money; while, on the other hand, legacies are only
valid when bequeathed by will.

\(11) He can likewise ask him to whom anything is delivered to give it
in his turn, either wholly or in part, to another, or even to give him
some other property.

\(12) And because the original trusts were dependent upon the good faith
of heirs, and thence derived both their name and nature, and because the
Divine Augustus rendered them obligatory by law; We, Ourselves, have
recently attempted to surpass the Emperor, and have promulgated a
Constitution arising from a matter suggested by that eminent man
Tribonian, the QuÃ¦stor of Our Sacred Palace; by which We have
established that if a testator has confided in the good faith of his
heir to transfer his estate or the special object of a trust, and the
fact cannot be proved either by a written instrument or by five
witnesses, (which is recognized as a legal number where trusts are
concerned) but a smaller number than five, or absolutely no witness was
present; then whether it was the father of the heir, or anyone else
whosoever, who confided in the good faith of the heir and desired that
something be delivered by him, and the heir, influenced by perfidy,
refused to discharge his trust by denying that the incident occurred as
stated; if the beneficiary of the trust calls upon him to make oath, he
himself having first sworn that he was not acting wrongfully; the heir
is required either to swear that he heard nothing of this kind said by
the testator, or if he refuses to do so, he must be forced to discharge
the trust, whether it relates to the entire estate or merely to a
portion of the same; so that the last wishes of the testator, dependent
upon the good faith of the heir, may not be rendered nugatory.

We have decreed that the same rule shall be observed where any property
left in like manner imposes an obligation upon a legatee or the
beneficiary of a trust. If the party to whom the property said to be
subject to an obligation has been left, acknowledges that this is the
case, but has recourse to the subtlety of the law, he shall, in every
instance, be forced to make payment.

TITLE XXIV. CONCERNING PARTICULAR THINGS LEFT IN TRUST.

Anyone can also leave particular things in trust, as, for instance, a
tract of land, a slave, a garment, vessels of silver, or money; and he
can request either the heir himself, or a legatee to deliver it to a
third person, although he cannot charge a legatee with the payment of a

legacy.

\(1) A testator, moreover, can leave not only his own property in trust
but also that of his heir or legatee, as well as that of a beneficiary
under the trust, or of anyone else whomsoever. Therefore, not only can
the legatee or the beneficiary under the trust be asked to deliver to
another party whatever has been left him; but this can likewise be done
with reference to other property, whether it belongs to him or to some
one else; and this must only be observed in order that no one may be
asked to deliver to another person more than he himself has received
under the will, for a request for more than this is void. Also, when the
property of another is left in trust, he who has been asked to deliver
it must either purchase the article itself and deliver it, or pay what
it is worth.

\(2) Freedom can also be granted a slave by way of trust, so that either
an heir, a legatee, or a beneficiary of the trust may be requested to
manumit him, and it is immaterial whether the testator makes a request
with respect to his own slave, or concerning one that belongs to the
heir himself, or to a legatee, or even to a stranger; and therefore a
slave belonging to a stranger must be purchased and manumitted. If his
owner is unwilling to sell him Â— it being presumed that he has received
nothing by the will of the party who leaves the slave his freedom Â— the
fiduciary grant of freedom is not immediately extinguished, but merely
deferred; because, in the course of time, freedom may be bestowed upon
him whenever an opportunity occurs to purchase the slave.

Where he is manumitted by reason of a trust, he does not become the
freedman of the testator even though he may be his slave, but he becomes
the freedman of the party who manumitted him; while he who was directly
ordered to be liberated by the will, becomes the freedman of the
testator himself, and is designated "*orcinus*".^1^** No one, however,
can obtain his freedom directly by will, excepting one who has been a
slave of the testator at both times, that is when he made his will, and
when he died; and freedom is considered as directly bestowed when a
testator does not request that the slave be manumitted by some other
person, but expresses his desire that he shall obtain his freedom by
means of his own will.

\(3) The following are the words generally used in instituting trusts:
"I request, I ask, I wish, I direct, I confide in your good faith"; and
these terms are as obligatory when used separately, as they are when all
are employed together.

^1^ So called because his patron, the testator, was now an inmate of the
infernal regions, the domain of Orcus, or Pluto. Â— ED.

TITLE XXV. CONCERNING CODICILS.

It *is* well established that the law of codicils did not exist before
the time of Augustus, but that Lucius Lentulus, through whose agency
trusts also originated, introduced the use of codicils. For, while he
was dying in Africa, he left a codicil confirmed by his will by which he
requested Augustus to do something by way of a trust; and when the
Divine Augustus fulfilled his request, others subsequently, following
his example, executed trusts; and the daughter of Lentulus paid legacies
which legally she did not owe. Then Augustus is said to have assembled
learned jurists, among whom was Trebatius, whose opinion at that time
was of the greatest value, and to have asked whether this could be
permitted, and whether the use of codicils was not contrary to the rules
of law; and Trebatius persuaded Augustus by stating that this was most
useful and necessary for citizens, on account of the many and long
journeys that took place among the ancients, so that where a man could
not make a will, he could still be able to make a codicil.

After this time, when Labeo also had made a codicil, there was no doubt
in the mind of anyone that codicils could be accepted in perfect
compliance with the law.

\(1) Not only can anyone make a codicil after he has made a will, but
also any person dying intestate can create a trust by means of a
codicil. But Papinian says that when a codicil has been made before a
will has been executed, it has no force, unless it is afterwards
confirmed by an express statement; still the Divine Emperors Severus and
Antoninus declared in a Rescript that the execution of a trust could be
demanded by virtue of a codicil which preceded a will, if it were
established that the party who afterwards made the will had not revoked
the wish which he had expressed in the codicil.

\(2) An estate, however, can neither be given nor taken away by means of
a codicil, for if it could, the effect of wills and codicils would be
confused; and, for this reason, no disinheritance can be inserted in a
codicil. An estate cannot be given or taken away by a codicil except
directly; for it can be legally left as a trust by means of one. A
condition cannot be imposed upon an appointed heir, nor can a
substitution be made directly by a codicil.

\(3) Anyone can make several codicils, and they require no particular
mode of execution.
