THE ENACTMENTS OF JUSTINIAN. BOOK IV.

TITLE I. CONCERNING OBLIGATIONS ARISING FROM CRIME.

Since it has been explained in the preceding Book what obligations
arising from contracts and quasi-contracts are, We have next to examine
obligations growing out of crime. The former, however, as We stated in
its place, are divided into four classes; but the latter are included in
only one class, for they all arise from an act, that is to say from the
crime itself, for instance, from theft, robbery, damage, or injury.

\(1) Theft is the fraudulent handling of property, whether of the
article itself or the use or possession of the same, and to commit it is
prohibited by natural law.

\(2) The term *furtum* is either derived from *furvus*, that is to say,
black, because it is committed secretly and obscurely, and usually by
night; or from *fraus;* or from *ferendo*, that is carrying away; or
from a Greek word, as the Greeks call thieves fwreV and they also say
that the term fwreV comes from fereiu**.

\(3) There are two kinds of theft, namely: manifest and non-manifest;
for *conceptum* and *oblatum* are rather certain kinds of action
relating to theft than species of theft, as will appear later. A
manifest thief is one whom the Greeks designate: ep autofwrw and means
not only

he who is caught in the very act of theft, but also he who is caught in
the place where it is perpetrated; as, for example where one who has
committed a theft in a house and is taken before he has yet issued from
the door; or he who has committed a theft of olives in an olive orchard,
or of the grapes in a vineyard, provided he be caught in the said olive
orchard or vineyard.

Moreover, manifest theft should further include a case where the thief
has been seen or arrested with the stolen property in his possession,
either in a public or private place, and either by the owner or by some
other party, before he has arrived at the point where he intended to
carry and deposit the article; but where he has carried it as he
intended, even though he may be arrested with it in his possession, he
is not a manifest thief. What non-manifest theft signifies may be
understood from what We have said; for theft that is not manifest is
evidently non-manifest.

\(4) A theft is styled *conceptum* when the stolen property is sought
for and found in the possession of anyone in the presence of witnesses;
for a certain kind of suit called *actio concepti* lies against him,
even though he may not be the thief. A theft is called *oblatum,*, when
the stolen property has been brought to you and is found in your
possession, if the party who gave it to you did so with the intention
that it should be found on your premises rather than on those of him who
brought it, for a proceeding called *actio oblati* has been provided in
your favor against him who brought you the property, even if he was not
the thief.

There is also an *actio prohibiti furti* which lies against him who
resists anyone desirous of searching for stolen property in the presence
of witnesses. Moreover, a penalty is prescribed by the Edict of the
Prætor through an *actio furti non exhibiti* against a party who did not
produce property which was sought for and found in his possession. These
actions, however, that is to say *concepti, oblati, furti, prohibiti*
and *furti non exhibiti*, have fallen into disuse; for as the search for
stolen property is not conducted at present in accordance with the
ancient method, the aforesaid actions are in consequence no longer
generally made use of; since it is very evident that all who knowingly
receive stolen property and conceal it are liable for non-manifest
theft.

\(5) The penalty for manifest theft is fourfold, whether the culprit be
a slave or a freeman; that for non-manifest theft is double.^1^

^1^ The extremely slow development of the public prosecution of criminal
offenses is one of the most remarkable facts in the history of Roman
jurisprudence. It was not known to the legislation of the Republic. The
first instance of the recognition of the principle that he who wilfully
violates the rights of another, to his serious personal injury, is
guilty of a public wrong, and is accountable to the State, is found in
the laws enacted by Sylla, eighty-one years before the Christian Era.
The old idea was that crimes, like robbery, theft, and rape, should be
the subject of personal actions, and were a matter of concern only to
the individuals directly involved and their families. This was an
outgrowth of the rule that almost any offense, no matter how flagrant,
might be condoned by the payment of a specific sum of money, which
during the infancy of society had been preceded by the *Lex Talionis*.
The atrocious doctrine of "an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth" is
prominently set forth in the Laws of the Twelve Tables, and was rigidly

\(6) A theft takes place not only when anyone removes the property of
another for the sake of appropriating it, but, generally speaking, when
anyone handles another's property against the consent of the owner.
Therefore, whether a creditor makes use of a pledge, or a depositary of
property left with him, or whether he who received an article to be
used, employs it for some other purposes than that for which it was
given, he commits a theft; for instance, if anyone has received silver
to be used where friends are invited to supper, and takes it away with
him out of town; or where anyone to whom a horse has been lent for the
purpose of taking a ride, removes it to a greater distance; and the
example which the ancients mentioned in this case was that of one who
took the horse into battle.

\(7) It has been established, however, that they who use property which
has been borrowed for other purposes than those for which they receive
it commit a theft, when they know that they are doing this contrary to
the will of the owner, and that if he were aware of the act he should
not permit it; and if they believe that he would permit it they are not
guilty of the crime; and the distinction is certainly an excellent one,
as theft is not committed without the intention of stealing.

\(8) And if anyone believes that he is making use of property loaned to
him against the will of the owner, but in fact it is done with the
consent of the latter, it is said that no theft is committed. Wherefore,
it has been asked; when Titius solicited a slave of Mævius to steal
certain property from his master and bring it to him, and the slave
acquainted Mævius with this; and Mævius, desiring to catch Titius in the
act, permitted the said slave to take certain property to him; whether
Titius is liable in an action for theft, or in an action for the
corruption of a slave, or in neither of these? And as the resolution of
this doubt has been submitted to Us, and We have examined the arguments
of the ancient lawyers on this point, (some of whom hold that

enforced for centuries. Malicious intent was an essential ingredient of
every offense for which a penal action lay; a doctrine which was
transmitted to the juridical heirs of the Empire.

The distinction between Penal and Criminal Law, the former being of much
greater scope, was not recognized by the ancient Roman jurists, who
confounded torts with acts involving moral turpitude. As stated above,
the custom of private retribution was the basis of criminal procedure,
as manifested in actions for the collection of pecuniary penalties from
persons who had designedly interfered with, or violated the rights of
others. The noxal action, which antedated the Twelve Tables, is a case
in point. By this means, the injured party could exact compensation for
the wrong by the surrender of the child or the slave responsible for it,
in order that private revenge might be wreaked upon the person of the
culprit, who was regarded as a mere thing, the property of the father or
master. The right to demand the surrender originally was absolute; in
the course of time, however, it was permitted to make restitution by the
payment of a sum of money by way of damages. That the *noxa* has, to a
certain degree, survived to our times is shown by the liability of the
master for the injurious acts of his servant, a reminiscence of the
period when all servants were slaves.

The doctrine of self-redress, based upon personal revenge, and, in
barbarous ages, afforded legal sanction by the *Lex Talionis*, is then
the original method adopted by human society in its infancy for the
protection of its members. The deterrent effect of modern legislation
was only indirectly, if at all, considered in its application.  ED.

neither an action for theft nor a action for corrupting a slave will
lie, and others think that only an action of theft is proper) We,
desiring to oppose craftiness of this kind, have determined by Our
decision that not only the action of theft, but also that for corrupting
a slave can be brought against the party; for although the slave may not
have been rendered worse by his making the request of him, and therefore
the rules which laid the foundation for the action for corrupting a
slave may not be entirely applicable; nevertheless, the advice of the
corrupting party contributed to the destruction of the honesty of the
slave, so that he is liable to the penal action just as if the slave had
been actually corrupted; to the end that such a wicked act may not be
attempted by anyone against some other slave who might be corrupted as a
result of impunity under such circumstances.

\(9) Sometimes theft of even freemen can be committed; for example,
where one of Our children who is under Our control is stolen.

\(10) Sometimes also a party commits a theft of his own property; as,
for instance, where a debtor clandestinely removes an article which he
has deposited with his creditor by way of pledge.

\(11) Sometimes a person is liable for theft who himself did not commit
it; of such a description is he by whose assistance and advice a theft
has been committed; and in this class is comprehended one who knocked
money out of your hand that another might carry it away; or hindered you
so that another might remove your property; or dispersed your sheep or
oxen, that another might take them; and the example given by ancient
writers was that of a party who put a drove of cattle to flight by the
use of a red cloth. Where any of these things is done through mischief,
and not in order to commit a theft, an action *in factum*^1^** ought
to.be brought. But where Titius has perpetrated a theft with the
assistance of Mævius, both are liable to the action for theft.

Theft is also considered to have been committed by the assistance and
advice of him who, for example, placed a ladder by a window; or broke a
window or a door in order that another might commit a theft; or lent
iron tools for breaking in, or a ladder to be placed at a window,
knowing for what purpose he lent these things. It is evident that

^1^ The *actio in factum*, or "action on the fact", derived its origin
from the equitable jurisdiction of the Prætor, whose duty it was, in the
interpretation and application of the law, rather to adhere to the broad
principles of justice than to the circumscribed and severe rules of
legal procedure handed down from antiquity. There were many forms of
this action, the most important being the *Actio in factum concepta*,
founded on a fact which did not come within the strict terms of the law
but presented an analogy to the object for which it was enacted  the
word *concepta *always indicating a record; the *actio in factum
præscriptis verbis *arising out of such contracts as sale, partnership,
hiring, etc., where no special formula was provided by the Civil Law;
the *actio in factum contra eum, qui sine venia in jus vocavit*, or
proceeding against one who summoned another to court without excuse; and
the *actio in factum de re certa, *for a certain sum of money, or *cum,
præfinitione*, when the amount to be received was not specifically
designated.

The *actio in factum* differed from the *Condictio*, or personal action,
in that the latter was based on a contract authorized by statute, while
the institution of the former rested in the discretion of the Prætor. 
ED.

where a party did not render aid for the commission of a theft, but
merely gave advice, and encouragement for the perpetration thereof, he
is not liable to the action for theft.

\(12) When those under the control of parents or masters pilfer anything
from them, they commit a theft against them, and whatever is taken
becomes stolen property (so that it cannot on this account be held by
usucaption before it is returned to the possession of the owner); but an
action for theft does not lie because an action cannot arise between
these persons for any cause whatever. But if the theft was committed by
the assistance and advice of another, for the reason that there is no
doubt that theft has been committed, the party is very justly liable to
the action for theft, because it is a fact that the theft was
perpetrated by his assistance and advice.

\(13) An action for theft can be brought by him who is interested in the
security of the property, although he may not be the owner of the same;
and therefore an action does not lie in favor of the owner unless it is
to his interest that the property should not be destroyed.

\(14) Wherefore it is established that a creditor can bring the action
of theft for a pledge which has been stolen, even though he may have a
debtor who is solvent; because it is advantageous for the creditor
rather to rely upon the pledge than upon a personal action; so that,
even if the debtor may have removed the property, an action for theft
will nevertheless lie in behalf of the creditor.

\(15) In like manner if a fuller has received clothing to be pressed or
cleaned, or a tailor has received it to be repaired, for a certain
compensation, and loses the articles by theft, he, and not the owner,
can bring an action for theft; because the owner has no interest in the
preservation of the property as he can recover it from the fuller or
tailor by an action of hiring. But when an article is purloined from a
*bona fide* purchaser after he has bought it, an action of theft will
lie just as much in his favor (although he is not the owner) as it would
in favor of a creditor; it has, however, been decided that an action of
theft will not lie in favor of the fuller or tailor except where they
are solvent, that is, if they are able to pay the value of the article
to the owner; for if they are not solvent, then for the reason that the
owner cannot recover his property from them, an action of theft will lie
in favor of the owner himself; because in this instance it is to his
interest that the property should be secure; and the same rule is
applicable where the fuller or tailor is partly solvent.

\(16) What We have stated with reference to the fuller and tailor the
ancients held should also apply to a party who had received property as
a loan for use; for just as a fuller, by accepting compensation assumes
responsibility for safe-keeping, so he who borrows anything for use
likewise becomes liable for its custody. By way of precaution We have
also corrected this by Our decisions, so that it depends upon the will
of the owner whether he shall bring an action of loan against the party
who borrowed the article, or one of theft against him who stole it; and,
having chosen one of these, he cannot change his mind and bring the
other action. If, indeed, he chooses to sue the thief, the

party who received the property to be used is absolutely released from
all liability; while if the lender proceeds against him who received the
property for use, an action of theft can, by no means, be brought by him
against the thief, but one can be brought against him by the party who
has been sued on account of the article loaned.

These are the proper proceedings where the master, aware that the
article has been stolen, brings an action against him to whom it was
lent; but if he ignorantly and being in doubt as to whether the property
was in the possession of the borrower, institutes an action of loan, and
afterwards, when the facts have been ascertained, wishes to abandon the
action of loan, and have recourse to that of theft; then, permission
shall be granted him to bring suit against the thief, and no obstacle
shall be placed in his way; since being uncertain when he proceeded by
an action of loan against the party who received the property to be
used, (unless the latter had satisfied the owner; for then the thief is
absolutely free from the action of theft, and is instead subjected to
liability to the party who has paid the owner for the property loaned)
and while it is perfectly evident that, even in the beginning, the owner
instituted the action of loan while ignorant that the property had been
stolen, still if he having afterwards ascertained this fact, has
recourse to the thief, the party who received the property loaned is
absolutely released from all liability, no matter what may be the result
of the action brought by the owner against the thief; and the same rule
applies whether he who received the property as a loan is partly or
wholly solvent.

\(17) He, however, with whom property is deposited does not guarantee
its safe-keeping, but is only responsible for whatever he himself does
fraudulently; for which reason if the property is stolen from him, he
cannot bring an action of theft, because he is not bound to restore the
property because of the deposit, and therefore is not interested in its
being secure; but an action of theft will lie in favor of the owner.

\(18) In conclusion, it must be noted that it was a question whether a
person under puberty commits a theft by removing property belonging to
another; and it is now settled that because theft is dependent upon the
intention, such a person can only be liable for this crime if he had
very nearly arrived at puberty, and for this reason is aware that he is
committing an offence.

\(19) The action of theft, whether for double or quadruple value,
relates only to the recovery of a penalty, for the owner has, in
addition, another proceeding for the recovery of the property itself;
that is to say, either *vindicatio* or *condictio. Vindicatio*, however,
must be employed against the possessor, whether he is the thief or
someone else, while *condictio* must be brought against the thief or his
heir, although he may not have possession of the property.

TITLE II. CONCERNING ROBBERY BY VIOLENCE.

He who seizes the property of another by force is also liable for theft,
for who handles the property of another more thoroughly against the will
of the owner than he who carries it away by force? And therefore it is
justly said that he is an audacious thief. The Prætor, however, has
introduced an action peculiar to this crime, which is designated *actio
vi bonorum raptorum;* and it is fourfold the value if brought within a
year, and for single value if brought after a year has elapsed; and this
action is available when anyone has stolen by violence any article, no
matter how small it may be.

The fourfold value is not entirely a penalty, nor does an action lie for
the recovery of the property in addition to the penalty, as We stated
when treating of the action of manifest theft; but the recovery of the
property is included in the fourfold value, so that the penalty is
thrice the value, whether the culprit is taken in the act or not; for it
is absurd that he who seizes property by force should be considered as
of less importance than one who removes it secretly.

\(1) However, as this action does not lie except against some one who
has forcibly taken something with evil intent, but where a party through
error, believing the property to be his, and ignorant of the law,
carries it away by violence, being of the opinion that an owner is
permitted to remove what is his own by force from those who have
possession of the same, he should be acquitted; and, for the same
reason, it is proper that he should not be liable for theft who took the
property away by force while holding this belief.

But, lest by employing such pretexts means may be invented by which
robbers can indulge their avaricious propensities with impunity, it has
been judiciously provided with reference to this by certain
constitutions of the Emperors, that no one shall be permitted to take
away by force any property which is movable or which can move itself,
even though he thinks that it is his; and if anyone acts contrary to
these laws he shall forfeit the ownership of the property if it belongs
to him, but if it belongs to someone else, he must pay the value of said
property after having made restitution of the same. This principle the
said constitutions have not only stated are applicable to movable
articles which can be forcibly taken away, but also to interference with
property belonging to the soil; so that men may for this reason refrain
from all kinds of robbery by violence.

\(2) In this action it is evidently not essential that the property
should be part of that belonging to the plaintiff; for whether it is or
is not a part of the same, the action can be brought, provided it was
merely removed from among his other possessions. Wherefore, if it was
loaned, leased, pledged, or even deposited with Titius, so that it was
to his interest that it should not be removed; for example, if it had
been deposited and he agreed to be liable for negligence; or if he
possessed it in good faith; or had the usufruct in it, or any other
right, so that it was to his interest that it should not be taken away;
it must be held

that this action will lie in his favor, not that he may recover the
ownership of the property, but only that which was taken from among his
possessions, that is to say from the resources of him who suffered the
robbery.

It should be stated generally that the same causes which authorize an
action of theft on account of some clandestine act, are also sufficient
ground for an action of this kind.

TITLE III. CONCERNING THE AQUILIAN LAW.

The action for damage wrongfully committed was established by the *Lex
Aquilia*, in the first Section of which it is provided that if anyone
has wrongfully killed the slave of another or a quadruped belonging to
the class of cattle, he shall be condemned to pay to the owner the
greatest amount that the said property was worth during that year.

\(1) And this, moreover, does not merely refer to quadrupeds, but only
to such as belong to the class of cattle, and signifies that we should
not understand the provision to refer to wild beasts, or dogs, but only
to such animals as can properly be said to pasture, such as horses,
mules, asses, oxen, sheep, and goats. The same provision also applies to
swine, for swine are included in the term cattle, because they pasture
in droves, and as such, indeed, Homer mentions them in the Odyssey, as
Ælius Marcianus states in his Institutes:

"You will find him

Seated beside his swine, whose pasture Is near the rock of Korax, and at
the spring Of Arethusa."

\(2) A person is understood to kill wrongfully who kills without any
right; and therefore he who kills a robber is not liable, that is if he
could not otherwise avoid danger.

\(3) Nor is anyone liable under this law who kills by accident, provided
he cannot be accused of negligence; for otherwise anyone is liable under
this law not less for negligence than for malice.

\(4) Therefore, if anyone while engaged in sport or practising with
javelins should kill your slave while he is passing by, a distinction
arises; for if this was done by a soldier while in camp, or where such
practice ordinarily takes place, he cannot be charged with negligence;
but if anyone else should commit such an act, he is guilty of
negligence. The same rule applies to a soldier if he committed the act
in any other place than that appointed for military exercises.

\(5) Again, where a person who is trimming a tree by throwing down a
branch killed your slave while he is passing by; if this was done near a
public highway or one leading through private premises, and he did not
give warning so that the accident might be avoided, he is guilty of
negligence; but if he did give warning, and the slave did not take the
trouble to be careful, he who was trimming the tree is not liable for
negligence. A person is also understood not to be liable for

negligence where he was cutting branches at a distance from the road or
in the middle of a field, even though he did not give warning, because
no stranger had a right to be wandering around there.

\(6) Moreover, if a physician who has operated upon your slave neglects
his treatment, and the slave dies for this reason, the physician is
guilty of negligence.

\(7) Lack of skill is also considered negligence, as for instance, where
a physician caused the death of your slave because he operated on him
improperly or administered medicine to him which was not suitable.

\(8) Also, when your slave has been knocked down by the onset of mules
which the muleteer could not control on account of his want of skill,
the muleteer is guilty of negligence; but if he could not restrain them
on account of weakness, he is equally liable for negligence, provided
another stronger than he could have controlled them. The same rule was
established with reference to one who either through weakness or want of
skill was unable to control the movements of the horse which he was
riding.

\(9) The meaning contained in the following words of the law: "Of the
greatest amount that it was worth during that year"; is that where
anyone has killed one of your slaves who was at that time lame, blind of
an eye, or crippled, but during the year had been sound or salable at a
good price, the party who killed him is liable, not for what he was
worth at the time of his death, but for the largest sum he was worth
during the year; for which reason it has been presumed that the action
growing out of this law is a penal one, since the party is liable not
only for the amount of the actual damage, but sometimes for far more;
and therefore it is held that the action does not persist as against the
heir, which it would have done if the sum involved in the suit had not
been greater than the damage sustained.

\(10) What follows has been decided, not according to the terms of the
law, but by its interpretation, that is, that the amount to be estimated
not only includes the destruction of the body of the slave, in
accordance with what We have stated, but also any damage in addition
which you have sustained on account of the death of the slave; as, for
instance, where a man has killed a slave of yours who had been appointed
an heir by some one before he had entered on the estate by your order;
for it is settled that the value of the estate which has been lost must
also be taken into consideration. In like manner, if anyone has killed
one of a pair of mules, or one of a team of horses, or a slave belonging
to a band of comedians, the appraisement of the damage is not limited to
the property which is killed, but the depreciation in value of whatever
survives must also be computed.

\(11) Where the slave of anyone is killed, the owner is at liberty to
bring suit for damages by a private action under the *Lex Aquilia*, and
also to prosecute the culprit for a capital offence.

\(12) The Second Section of the *Lex Aquilia* is not in use at pres-

ent.

\(13) In the Third Section provision is made concerning every other kind
of damage. Therefore, if anyone has wounded a slave or a quadruped
classed under the term cattle, or wounded or killed a quadruped not
belonging to said class, as, for instance a dog or a wild beast, the
action must be brought under this Section. Also, with reference to all
other animals, as well as property which is without life, where damage
is inflicted wrongfully, suit is brought under this Section; for if
anything is burned, broken, or dashed to pieces, the action is based
upon this Section, although the term "broken" would be sufficient in all
these cases, since by it is understood whatever is ruined in any way.
Wherefore, not only articles which are burned, or dashed to pieces, but
also such as are torn, battered, spilled, and in any way ruined and
deteriorated, are included in this term; and in a word, it has been
decided that if a man should mix something with the wine or oil
belonging to another by means of which the natural goodness of the wine
or oil is impaired, he will be liable under this Section of the law.

\(14) It is also evident that as anyone is liable under the First
Section only where a slave or a quadruped has been killed either
maliciously or through negligence; so, under this Section, the party is
also liable for every other kind of damage resulting from malice or
negligence. Under this Section, however, he who caused the damage is not
liable for the value of the property during that year, but only during
the thirty days immediately preceding the commission of the act.

\(15) And not even the term "largest sum" is added, but it has been
justly held by Sabinus that the estimate of damage must be made just as
if the expression "the largest sum" had been likewise inserted into this
Section; for the Roman plebeians who enacted this law (which was
proposed by the tribune Aquilius) were satisfied because that term was
mentioned in the First Section of the said law.

\(16) It has also been determined that if an action can be brought under
this law only where anyone has unquestionably inflicted damage by means
of his own body; and therefore equitable actions are usually granted
against a party who has caused damage in some other way; for example,
where anyone has shut up the slave or flock of another party so that it
died from hunger; or has driven a beast of burden with such violence
that it was ruined; or has frightened an animal so badly that it fell
and was trampled upon; or where anyone has induced a slave belonging to
another to climb a tree, or descend into a well, and while ascending or
descending he was either killed, or injured in some part of his body; in
instances of this kind an equitable action is granted against him.

But where anyone has thrown down the slave of another from a bridge or a
bank into a river and the slave was drowned because of having been
thrown into the water, it cannot be difficult to understand that he
caused the damage by means of his body, and therefore he is liable under
the *Lex Aquilia*. But where the damage has not been inflicted by his
body, or the body of the animal injured, but has happened to something
in some other way, since neither the direct Aquilian nor an equitable
action can be brought, it has been decided that he who is

to blame is liable to an *actio in factum;* as, for instance where
anyone influenced by pity has released the slave of another from his
shackles in order that he might escape.

TITLE IV. CONCERNING INJURIES.

An injury, generally speaking, means everything that is done contrary to
law, and particularly it sometimes signifies outrage, which is derived
from the word *contemnere*, and is styled by the Greeks ubriV at other
times gross negligence which the Greeks designate adikhma, and in this
way "unlawful damage" is understood in the *Lex Aquilia;* and then again
it denotes unfairness and injustice which the Greeks call adikia*, *for
when a Prætor or a Judge renders a decision against anyone contrary to
law the latter is said to have sustained an injury.

\(1) Injury is committed not only when anyone is struck with the fist,
or with a stick, or scourged; but also when insulting language is
addressed to him in public; or when anyone's property is taken
possession of as if he was a debtor by a party who knew that he did not
owe him anything; or where anyone has written, composed, or published a
paper or a poem to another's dishonor, or has maliciously caused any of
these things to be done; or where anyone has followed a married woman,
or a boy or girl who has not arrived at puberty; or when the modesty of
some person is said to have been attacked; and in short, it is evident
that injury can be committed in many other ways.

\(2) Anyone suffers injury not only in his own person but also in that
of his children who are under his control, as well as in that of his
wife, for this opinion has generally prevailed. Therefore, if you
inflict an injury upon the daughter of a person who is married to
Titius, not only can an action be brought against you for injury in the
name of the daughter, but also one in that of her father, and another in
that of her husband as well.

But, on the other hand, where the injury has been inflicted upon a
husband, his wife cannot bring an action for injury, for it is proper
for wives to be defended by their husbands, and not husbands by their
wives. A father-in-law can also bring an action for injury in the name
of his daughter-in-law when her husband in under his control.

\(3) It is understood, however, that no injury can be inflicted upon
slaves themselves, but it is considered to be inflicted upon their
masters through them; not indeed in the same way as though children and
wives, but only when some atrocious act is committed which seems to be
plainly intended as an outrage against the master; as, for instance
where anyone has whipped a slave belonging to another, and, in this case
an action is granted. But where anyone publicly abuses a slave, or
strikes him with his fist, no action can be brought against him by the
master.

\(4) Where an injury has been inflicted upon a slave who is the common
property of two or more masters, it is equitable that the esti-

mate of the injury should be made not in proportion to the interest
which each master has in him, but with regard to the rank of the
masters, because the injury is inflicted upon them.

\(5) But where the usufruct in a slave belongs to Titius, and the
ownership to Mævius, the injury is understood to be inflicted upon
Mævius rather than upon Titius.

\(6) Where, however, the injury has been inflicted upon a freeman who is
serving you in good faith as a slave, no action will be granted you, but
the freeman can bring suit in his own name, unless he has been beaten in
order to inflict an outrage upon you, for then an action for injury will
lie in your favor. Therefore, the same principle applies where a slave
who belongs to another is serving you in good faith; so that an action
for injury will be granted you whenever the injury has been committed
for the purpose of affronting you.

\(7) By a law of the Twelve Tables the penalty for injury was
retaliation where a limb had been destroyed; but where a bone was broken
pecuniary penalties were imposed in proportion to the great poverty of
the ancients. Subsequently, however, the Prætors permitted those who had
sustained an injury to make the estimate themselves, so that the judge
condemns the party in the sum which he who sustained the injury
estimates as damage, or in a smaller amount, according as it seems to
him to be proper.

The penalty fixed by the law of the Twelve Tables for injury has fallen
into disuse, and that which the Prætors introduced, and which is
designated "honorary", is imposed in lawsuits, for the estimate of the
injury is increased or diminished in proportion to the dignity and
honorable position in life of the person injured; and this scale adopted
in condemnation is not unreasonably observed even with reference to
anyone in a servile condition; so that one amount is fixed where the
slave is a steward, another where he has employment of less importance,
and still another where he is of the lowest rank and held in chains.

\(8) The *Lex Cornelia* mentions injuries, and introduced an action for
them which lies when a person alleges that he has been beaten or
scourged, or that his house has been entered by force. We understand the
term "house" to refer either to that which belongs to anyone and in
which he resides, or to one that he has leased, or to one in which he
has been received gratuitously or in the capacity of a guest.

\(9) An injury is deemed atrocious either from the act itself, as, for
instance, where anyone has been wounded or beaten with rods; or on
account of the place where the injury was committed, as in a theatre or
a forum, or in the presence of the Prætor; or on account of the position
of the person, for example where a magistrate sustained an injury, or
where an injury has been done to a senator by an individual of inferior
station, or to a parent or a patron by his children or freedmen (for an
injury to a senator, a parent, or a patron, is estimated in a different
way from that inflicted upon a stranger and a person of inferior rank);
and sometimes the location of the wound makes the injury atrocious, for
instance where a man is struck in the

eye; and it makes little difference whether an injury of this kind is
inflicted on the father of a family or the son of a family, for even in
the latter case it is considered an atrocious act.

\(10) In conclusion it must be noted that the party who sustains the
injury can, in every instance, proceed either criminally or civilly. If
he proceeds civilly, a penalty is imposed after an estimate has been
made, in accordance with what has already been stated; but if he
proceeds criminally, an extraordinary penalty is inflicted upon the
culprit by the judge in the discharge of the duty of his office. The
rule which a Constitution of Zeno introduced must, however, be observed,
namely; that men who are illustrious in rank and all who are above them
may either prosecute or defend a criminal action for injury by means of
an agent in accordance with the tenor of the same, as will appear more
clearly from the terms of the Constitution itself.

\(11) Not only is the person liable to a suit for injury who actually
perpetrated it, that is to say, he who struck the blow; but he also is
liable who maliciously acted or contrived so that the cheek of the party
received the blow with the fist.

\(12) This action is barred by concealment, and therefore if anyone
abandons an injury, that is to say, does not manifest resentment as soon
as he sustains it, he cannot, subsequently, by changing his mind revive
what he has already forgiven.

TITLE V.

CONCERNING OBLIGATIONS WHICH ARISE FROM A QUASI-CRIME.

If a judge makes a case his own, he is not, strictly speaking, liable as
for an unlawful act; but as he is also not liable upon a contract, and
it is evident that he has been guilty of a fault, although through
imprudence, it would seem that he is liable for a quasi-crime, and
should be condemned to pay such a penalty as appears to be equitable to
the moral sense of him who decides the case.

\(1) In like manner he from whose bedchamber, whether it is his own or
has been rented, or is one in which he was living without payment,
anything has been thrown down or poured out in such a way as to injure
someone, is understood to be responsible for a quasi-crime; for he
cannot, strictly speaking, be held liable for a crime, since in most
instances, he is bound for the negligence of another either as a slave
or a freeman.

The case is similar where he who has something so placed or suspended
over a road used for ordinary traffic, that if it falls down would
injure someone, in which event a fine of ten *aurei* has been
established; but where it fell down, or was poured out, action for
double the amount of the damage caused will lie. For the death of a
freeman a fine of fifty *aurei *is prescribed; if however, he lives, and
it is proved that he was injured, a right of action exists for whatever
amount seems to the judge to be equitable; and the latter must also
calculate the fees

paid to physicians and other expenses incurred in the cure, as well as
the value of the labor which the party has lost or will lose on account
of the incapacity which he suffers on this account.

\(2) Where the son of a family lives separate from his father and
something is thrown down or poured out from his room, or if he keeps
something so placed or suspended that its fall would be dangerous;
Julian decided that no action would lie against his father, but that it
must be brought against the son himself; and this rule is also
applicable where a judge under parental control has made a case his own.

\(3) Likewise, the master of a ship, of an inn, or of a stable is deemed
liable for a quasi-crime where any damage or theft is committed in the
said ship, inn, or stable, provided the offence is not his own, but that
of someone of those by whose labor he conducted the ship, the inn, or
the stable; for, as the action cannot be brought against him on any
contract, and still, to a certain extent he is guilty of negligence, and
because he made use of the services of wicked men, it appears that he is
liable for a quasi-crime. In these instances an *actio in factum* will
lie, and this is granted the heir of the party injured, but cannot be
brought against the heir of him who committed the illegal act.

TITLE VI. CONCERNING ACTIONS.

It remains for Us to speak of actions. An action is nothing else but the
right of bringing suit in court for whatever is owing to us.

\(1) The principal division of all actions between parties litigant
whether before judges or arbiters for any cause whatsoever, is into two
classes; that is to say, such as are either *in rem* or *in personam,
*for every plaintiff either brings a suit against a party who is liable
to him on a contract, or because of an illegal act, (in which instance
the action is brought *in personam*, and in it the party states that his
adversary should give him something or do something for him, or his
allegations are made in some other way) or he brings suit against a
party who is not liable to him personally, but against whom he
institutes proceedings relating to certain property, and in this case
the action granted is *in rem*. For instance, where a party has in his
possession some corporeal property which Titius says is his, but the
possessor says that he is the owner of the same; and if Titius in the
pleadings alleges that the said property is his, the action is *in rem*.

\(2) In like manner, if he states that he has the right of use and
enjoyment in a tract of land, or a house, or the right of walking or
driving over the premises of a neighbor, or of conducting water from the
land of a neighbor, the action is *in rem*. Of the same nature is the
action concerning an urban servitude, for example, where a party claims
that he has the right to raise his house higher, or the right to an
unobstructed view, or the right of causing something to project over his
neighbor's house or to insert timbers into it.

On the other hand, actions are also granted with reference to usufruct,
and the servitudes attaching to both rustic and urban estates;

so that where anyone, alleges that his adversary does not possess the
right of use and enjoyment, or of walking or driving, or of conducting
water, or of building to a greater height, or of an unobstructed view,
or of projecting anything over his neighbor's premises, or of insetting
anything into his house, these actions are also *in rem*, but they are
negative. This kind of action is not employed in controversies in which
corporeal property is involved; for in these cases the party who is not
in possession brings the suit, while the possessor has no right of
action by which he may deny that the said property belongs to the
plaintiff. In only one instance can the party who is in possession act
as plaintiff, as will be more conveniently set forth in Our greater
work, the Digest.

\(3) Those actions which We have mentioned and others similar to them
derive their origin from statutory enactments, or from the Civil Law.
Others, also, are those of which the Prætor has charge and arise from
his jurisdiction, these are both *in rem* and *in personam*, and it is
necessary to explain them by example. Thus, he generally permits a suit
*in rem* to be brought in such a way that the plaintiff alleges that he
has obtained a quasi-usucaption to which he had no such right; or on the
other hand that a possessor states that his adversary did not acquire
usucaption in property in which he in fact had such a right.

\(4) For where any property has been transferred by a good title, as,
for instance, on account of a sale, a donation, a dowry, or a legacy,
and the party receiving it has not yet obtained the absolute ownership
of the same; if he has by accident lost possession of it he has no
direct action *in rem* for its recovery, although actions were granted
by the Civil Law in order that anyone might assert his ownership; but
since it was clearly oppressive that an action could not be brought in a
case of this kind, one was introduced by the Prætor, in which he who has
lost possession alleges that he has obtained usucaption in the property,
and for this reason claims it as his own. This action is called
*Publician*, for the reason that it was first published in an Edict by
the Prætor Publicius.

\(5) Again on the other hand, where anyone who is absent on public
business or is in the power of the enemy, has acquired the right of
usucaption in the property of one remaining in the state, then, where
the possessor has ceased to be absent in the service of the country, the
owner is permitted within a year to bring suit for the said property the
usucaption having been annulled; that is, to do so by alleging that the
possessor has not obtained perfect usucaption, and that on this account
the property belongs to him.

The Prætor concedes this kind of action to certain other parties also,
being induced by similar sentiments of justice, as may be ascertained
from the more extensive treatise the Digest or Pandects.

\(6) Moreover, where anyone has transferred his property to another for
the purpose of defrauding his creditors, and the latter have been placed
in possession of said property by the decision of a magistrate, the
creditors are authorized to set aside the transfer and bring an action
for the property, that is to say, allege that it never was

transferred and for this reason remained a part of the property of the

debtor.

\(7) Moreover, the Servian and quasi-Servian actions  the latter being
also called "hypothecary" arise from the jurisdiction of the Prætor
himself. The Servian action is one by which any person may proceed
against the property of a tenant which is held by him in pledge for the
rent of land; and a quasi-Servian is one by which creditors may bring
suit for property either pledged or mortgaged. No distinction exists
between a pledge and a mortgage, so far as the hypothecary suit is
concerned; for where an agreement has been entered into between a debtor
and creditor so that something may be encumbered for a debt, both of
these are designated by this one name; but in other respects there is a
difference, for by the term pledge, properly speaking, We mean what is
immediately delivered to the creditor, especially if it is movable
property; but whatever is held by mere agreement, without delivery, We
declare is properly included by the term mortgage.

\(8) The Prætor has also introduced actions *in personam *arising from
his own jurisdiction; for example, the *actio de pecunia constituta*,
that the *actio receptitia* seemed to resemble, which by one of Our
Constitutions, (after any surplus provisions included in it had been
transferred to the *actio de pecunia constituta)* has been ordered to be
withdrawn from Our laws together with all its authority, as being
superfluous. The Prætor has likewise introduced an action with reference
to the *peculium* of slaves and parties under parental control, and one
by which it is sought to be ascertained whether the plaintiff has been
sworn, as well as several others.

\(9) The *actio de pecunia constituta*, can be brought against all those
who have agreed to make payment either in their own behalf or otherwise,
where no stipulation has been made; for where the party has given a
promise to him who stipulates he is liable by the Civil Law.^1^

\(10) The Prætor has introduced the actions for *peculium *against the
father and the master, because although under the strict construc-

The *actio de pecunia constituta* was a subsidiary remedy granted by the
Prætor in cases where the payment of money was promised at a certain
time under an agreement which had been entered into by the parties
without compliance with the formalities exacted by law. It was invented
to meet cases which would have been valid if a stipulation had been
made, and supplied the deficiency of a non-observance of the requisites
of the latter verbal contract. The *constitutum* of this proceeding
corresponded with the *pactum* of the action on stipulation, and always
presumed the existence of some species of obligation. The validity of
the *constitutum* was not affected if payment was made in merchandise
instead of money, but it was essential that the amount of the
indebtedness should be exactly discharged by whatever was given for that
purpose, for if there was a surplus the transaction was void.

The *actio receptitia* was another form of the same proceeding which was
authorized for the accommodation of bankers, and enforced compliance
with contracts where parties who were absent had promised others, also
absent, to settle a debt at a specified time, or place; an agreement
which under the rules governing stipulations was invalid.

Both the *actio de pecunia constituta* and the *actio receptitia *were
strictly prætorian or equitable actions, and entirely unknown to the
Civil Law.  ED.

tion of the law they are not liable for the contracts of their children
or slaves, nevertheless, it is but just that they should be condemned in
the amount of the *peculium*, as this is, as it were, the patrimony of
sons and daughters and of slaves as well.

\(11) Moreover, where anyone on a demand of his adversary swears that
the money for which he has brought suit is owing to him and has not been
paid; the Prætor most properly grants him an action in which it is to be
ascertained, not whether the money is owing to him, but whether he has
made oath.

\(12) He has also introduced a great many penal actions arising from his
jurisdiction, for example, against him who has damaged any portion of
his *album;* and against him who has brought his patron or his father
into court without previously obtaining permission to do so; and also
against him who has rescued a party by violence who had been called into
court, or by whose artifice another had rescued him; as well as in
innumerable other cases.

\(13) Prejudicial actions would appear to be *in rem*, such as those by
which inquiry is made whether anyone is a freeman or a freedman, or
concerning the acknowledgment of parentage; and among these that one
alone is founded upon the Civil Law by which inquiry is made whether a
certain party is free, while the others derive their origin from the
jurisdiction of the Prætor** himself.

\(14) Actions having therefore been distinguished in this manner, it is
evident that a plaintiff cannot demand his property from another party
by the words: "If it appears that he should give it"; for no obligation
exists to give what belongs to the plaintiff, because, in a word, that
is understood to be given to anyone which is bestowed in such a manner
that it becomes his own; nor can anything which already belongs to the
plaintiff be made his any more than it actually is. Nevertheless,
through hatred of thieves, and that they may be liable to a greater
number of actions, it has been established that in addition to the
penalty of double or quadruple the value, thieves may, for the purpose
of recovering the property be rendered liable to an action worded as
follows: "If it appears that they should give it"; although an action
*in rem* by means of which a party may bring suit for property alleging
that it belongs to him can also be brought against them.

\(15) We designate actions *in rem "vindicationes*", while we call
actions *in personam*, in which it is stated that our adversary should
give us something or do something for us, "*condictiones*". For in the
language of former times *condicere* meant *denumtiare;* but now we
improperly refer to a *condictio* as an action *in personam* by which
the plaintiff alleges that something ought to be given to him; for at
present there is no *denuntiatio*^1^** known by that name.

\(16) The next division is, that certain actions are available for the
purpose of recovering some particular property, others to obtain a
penalty, and others again are mixed.

^1^ *Vindicationes*, suits for the recovery of property. *Denuntiatio*,
notice to appear in court.  ED.

\(17) All actions *in rem* can be brought for the purpose of recovering
some particular property. Likewise, nearly all of those actions which
are *in personam*, which originate from a contract, appear to be
available for the purpose of obtaining some particular thing; for
example, those in which the plaintiff sues for money loaned or mentioned
in a stipulation, as well as suits on account of a loan, a deposit, a
mandate, a partnership, a sale and a lease. It is evident that where an
action of deposit is brought on the ground that the property was
deposited because of a tumult, a fire, the ruin of a building, or a
shipwreck; the Prætor authorizes an action for double the value,
provided it is brought against him with whom the article was deposited,
or against his heir, by reason of fraud committed by him; in which
instance the action is mixed.

\(18) Some actions available in the case of unlawful acts are instituted
solely in order to obtain a penalty, others for the purpose of obtaining
a penalty and the property, and for this reason they are mixed. A party
brings a suit for a penalty only in an action of theft; for whether it
is one of manifest theft for fourfold the value, or of non-manifest
theft for double the value, it is brought for the penalty alone, as the
party sues for the property itself by a separate action, that is to say
by demanding it as his, whether the thief himself or anyone else has it
in his possession; and, moreover, a *condictio* also lies against the
thief.

\(19) An action for property taken away by force is mixed, because the
recovery of the property is included in the fourfold value, hence the
penalty is threefold. The action for damages under the *Lex Aquilia* is
mixed, not only where it is brought for double the value against the
defendant, but sometimes where a party brings suit for the simple value;
as, for instance, where anyone has killed a slave who is lame, or
one-eyed, but who during the preceding year was sound, and of great
value; for then the party is condemned in the largest amount that the
slave was worth during the year, according to the division

already stated.

Moreover, an action is mixed when brought against those who have delayed
delivering property left as a legacy or trust to consecrated churches,
or other venerated places, so long that they have to be brought into
court; for then they are compelled to surrender either the property
itself or the money which was bequeathed, and an equal sum also by way
of penalty, and therefore the condemnation of the party is for double
the amount.

\(20) Certain other actions appear to be of a mixed nature being *in
rem* as well as *in personam*, and to these belong the action for
partition, which is available to co-heirs in order to divide an estate;
as well as the action for the division of common property granted to
those holding property in joint ownership that it may be divided; and
the action for the establishment of boundaries brought between those who
have adjoining lands. In these three actions the judge is permitted to
adjudicate the property in question to either of the litigants in
accordance with what is fair and just, and where the share of one of
them

seems to *be* too large to condemn him to pay to the other a certain sum
of money as an equivalent.

\(21) All actions are framed to obtain either single, double, or triple
value, but no action extends beyond these.

\(22) Suits are brought for single damages, for instance, such as grow
out of a stipulation, a loan, a sale, a lease, a mandate, and indeed out
of many other transactions.

\(23) We bring suit for twofold the amount, for example, in a case of
non-manifest theft, of wrongful injury based upon the *Lex Aquilia*, and
of deposit in certain instances. Moreover, a suit of this kind is
available where a slave has been corrupted, and lies against one by
whose advice and counsel a slave belonging to another has absconded, or
has become refractory toward his master, or has begun to live
licentiously, or, in a word, has deteriorated in any respect; and in
this action an estimate is made of any articles which the said slave
took with him when he ran away; and also where property has been left as
a legacy to sacred places, as We stated above.

\(24) A demand for triple damages can be made when anyone has inserted
into his complaint a larger amount than is true, so that for this reason
the court attendants, that is to say the bailiffs who execute the
process may exact a larger sum by way of fees; for then the defendant
can recover from the plaintiff threefold the amount of the loss which he
suffered on account of their act, so that in this triple amount is
included the simple damage which he sustained. This rule has been
introduced by a Constitution of Our own which is prominent in Our Code,
on which an *actio condictitia ex lege* can undoubtedly be based.

\(25) A demand for quadruple the amount may be made, for instance, in
cases of manifest theft, and also when an act has been performed through
fear, or where money has been paid in order that he to whom it was given
may, for the sake of annoyance, induce a party either to perform or not
to perform some act; and also an *actio condictitia ex lege* arises
under Our Constitution which imposes a quadruple penalty upon those
court attendants who extort anything from defendants contrary to the
rule established by said Constitution.

\(26) The actions for non-manifest theft and for corrupting a slave
differ from the others concerning which We have spoken at the same time,
in the fact that these are always for double the value; but the others,
that is the one for wrongful injury under the *Lex Aquilia*, and
sometimes that of deposit, are for double the amount when a denial is
made, and single damages are granted where the party makes a confession.

The action, however, which is available for the recovery of property
bequeathed to sacred places, not only provides for double damages when a
denial is made, but also when the heir has deferred delivery of what has
been bequeathed until brought into court by order of Our magistrates;
while only single damages are granted when the party admits that he is
liable and makes payment before proceedings are taken against him by the
order of the magistrates.

\(27) Moreover, the action growing out of what has been done because of
fear differs from the others which We have mentioned at the same time in
this, that it is tacitly understood in its nature that he who restores
the property to the plaintiff in compliance with the order of court
shall be acquitted. This is not so in other cases, but each party shall
in every instance be condemned in fourfold damages as in the action for
manifest theft.

\(28) Certain actions, moreover, are of good faith and others of strict
right. Those of good faith are such as arise from sale, lease, business
transacted, mandate, deposit, partnership, guardianship, loan, pledge,
partition of an estate, division of common property, the *actio
'præscriptis verbis* which relates to a sale at an estimated price, the
action growing out of an exchange, and the action for an estate;
although it was until recently uncertain whether the last should be
included among *bonæ fidei* actions or not, still one of Our
Constitutions has plainly declared it to be *bonæ fidei*.

\(29) There was formerly an action to recover the property of a wife
which was included among those of good faith, but as We found that the
action arising out of a stipulation was broader in scope, We transferred
all the regulations by which a wife's property was formerly governed,
together with their numerous divisions, to the action arising out of a
stipulation which was available for the purpose of recovering dowries;
and the action to recover the property of a wife having been abolished,
that arising from stipulation and introduced in its stead very justly
assumed the nature of the action of good faith and becomes such, but
only when used to recover a dowry. We have also granted the wife a
mortgage by implication; but We think she should only be preferred to
other hypothecary creditors when she herself, for whose sole benefit We
have introduced this provision, brings suit for her dowry.

\(30) Moreover, in actions of good faith free power appears to be
granted the judge of estimating in accordance with the principles of
justice and equity, how much should be paid to the plaintiff; and in
this he has authority, (if the plaintiff should, on his part have to pay
anything after this amount has been set off) to condemn the defendant to
pay the remainder to him who brought the suit.

In actions of strict right also, in compliance with a Rescript of the
Emperor Marcus, set-off was also permitted when an exception on the
ground of fraud was pleaded; but one of Our Constitutions has more
broadly introduced those set-offs which are based upon evident justice,
so that they diminish litigation by operation of law, whether the
actions are real or personal, or any others whatsoever, excepting only
the action of deposit, and where anything is opposed to this on the
ground of set-off We have considered it to be dishonorable, lest under
the pretence of set-off a depositor might be defrauded of the recovery
of the property he had deposited.

\(31) Moreover, We designate certain actions as "arbitrary", that is
dependent on the discretion of the judge; and in these, unless the
defendant satisfies the plaintiff in accordance with the discretion of
the

judge, that is unless he restores the property, or produces it, or makes
payment, or delivers up a slave in a case involving an illegal act, he
should have judgment rendered against him. Both real and personal
actions of this description exist; real for instance, the Publisian, the
Servian relating to the property of a tenant, and the quasi-Servian,
also styled hypothecary; personal, those in which the issue to be
determined is whether an act has been committed through fear or
fraudulently, and also that in which suit is brought for some article
which was promised to be delivered in a certain place.

The action for the production of property^1^ also depends upon the
discretion of the judge; for in these actions and in others similar to
them he is permitted to make an estimate of the amount which would
satisfy the plaintiff on just and equitable terms, dependent upon the
nature of the property for which the action is brought.

\(32) A judge under all circumstances, as far as it is possible, should
be careful to render a judgment for a definite sum of money or for a
certain article, although the amount involved in the action in
undetermined.

\(33) When anyone bringing a suit included more in the statement of his
claim than he was entitled to, he lost his case, in other words the
property; nor was complete restitution easily obtained from the Præter,
unless he was under twenty-five years of age; for just as relief was
ordinarily granted in other instances where a reason for it existed, so
also was it customary to give aid to a party of this kind if he had
failed by reason of his youth. And it is evident if there was so good a
ground for excusable error that the most prudent man might fail, relief
was granted, even though the party was more than twenty-five years of
age; for instance, where anyone brought suit for an entire legacy, and
afterwards a codicil was produced by which either a part of the legacy
was revoked, or legacies were bequeathed to other parties which caused
it to appear that the plaintiff had brought suit for more than
three-fourths, since legacies were diminished to that extent by the *Lex
Falcidia*.

*A* party can bring suit for too much in four ways, in the amount, in
time, in place, and in the nature of the article claimed. In amount, as,
for instance, where anyone sues for twenty *aurei* instead of the ten
which were owing to him, or where he who has an interest in property
claims it all or too large a share of it. In time, as, for instance,
where anyone brings an action before the appointed day or the condition
has been complied with; for he who pays later than he should do is
understood to pay too little, and on the same principle he who sues too
early is considered to sue for too much. Suit can also be brought for
too much with reference to place; as, for instance, where anyone who has
stipulated for something to be delivered to him at a certain

^1^ The Roman Prætor, as well as the English Chancellor, could, by legal
process, compel the production in court of written instruments or
articles required to establish the claim of a litigant; the Roman method
was designated the *actio ad exhibendum*. the English is familiar to
modern lawyers under the name of an equitable bill of discovery.  ED.

place, brings suit for it at another without mentioning the place where
he had agreed that the article should be delivered to him; for example,
where a party stipulates as follows: "Do you agree to pay me at
Ephesus?" and asserts absolutely that payment should be made to him at
Rome. In this case he is held to have brought suit for too much, because
the advantage which the party who promised him would have enjoyed if he
had paid at Ephesus is lost by his unqualified statement; and therefore
an arbitrary action is available where anyone brings suit elsewhere, in
which the advantage that the promisor would have possessed if he had
made payment at the place agreed upon is taken into account. This
advantage is frequently found to be material where merchandise, for
instance, wine, oil, and grain, which have different values in different
localities, is concerned, and money also is not loaned at the same
interest everywhere. When, however, anyone brings a suit at Ephesus,
that is in the identical place where he stipulated that he should be
paid, his action is regularly in accordance with law; and this also the
Prætor maintains, for the reason that the advantage of payment is
preserved for the party making the promise.

He who sues for too much with reference to the nature of the property is
considered to greatly resemble the party who sues for too much with
reference to place; as where a person stipulated with you as follows:
"Do you agree to give your slave Stichus or ten *aurei?*" and then
demands one or the other, that is the slave alone or the ten *aurei*
alone. He is understood to have brought suit for too much because in
this kind of stipulation the party making the promise has the choice
either of paying the money or giving the slave; and therefore he who
alleges that the money alone or the slave alone should be given to him
deprives his adversary of his right to make the choice, and in this way
renders his own condition better and that of his adversary worse. For
this reason a certain kind of action has been devised for a case of this
description, by means of which where anyone avers that the slave Stichus
or ten *aurei* should be given to him, he can bring suit in the same
terms in which he made the stipulation for himself. Moreover, where
anyone has stipulated generally for a slave and brings an action for
Stichus specifically; or having stipulated for wine in general, brings
one specifically for Campaman wine; or having stipulated for purple
cloth then brings one specifically for Tyrian cloth, he is understood to
bring suit for too much; because he takes the right of choice from his
adversary, who by the terms of the stipulation was at liberty to give
something else than what the action was brought for.

A party is even understood to bring suit for too much although he does
so for property of the least value; since it frequently happens that it
is easier for him who makes the promise to furnish that which is of
greater value.

These rules were formerly in use; but afterwards the *Lex Zenoniand *and
Our Constitution imposed certain limits upon them, and where, with
reference to time, suit has been brought for too much, the Constitution
of Zeno of divine memory, prescribes what course should be taken; but
where suit has been brought for too much with reference

to quantity or in any other respect, any damage which may result on this
account is punished, as We previously stated, by a judgment of
three-fold the amount in favor of the party against whom the excessive
demand was made.

\(34) If the plaintiff inserted in his petition less than he was
entitled to, as, for example, where ten *aurei* were due him, and he
alleges that he should be paid five; or where an entire tract of land
belonged to him, but he only brought suit for half of the same; he runs
no risk, for the judge will still condemn his adversary in the same case
to pay the balance, in compliance with the Constitution of Zeno of
divine memory.

\(35) Where anyone states one thing instead of another in his petition,
it is settled that he runs no risk, but when the facts are ascertained
We permit him to correct the mistake in the same case; as for instance,
where he who should have brought suit for the slave Stichus brought it
for Eros; or where anyone has alleged that something was owing to him
under a will, when in reality it was owing by reason of a stipulation.

\(36) There are, moreover, certain actions by means of which we recover
not all that is due to us, but sometimes the entire amount and sometimes
less; for instance, where we bring suit for the *peculium* of a son or a
slave; for if the amount of the said *peculium* is not less than what we
are attempting to recover, the father or the master will have judgment
rendered against him for the whole; but where the amount of the
*peculium* is found to be less than what was claimed, the court shall
render judgment for the full amount of its value. We shall explain in
its proper place how this *peculium, *should be estimated.

\(37) Moreover, where a married woman brings suit for the recovery of
her dowry, it is held that her husband should be condemned as far as he
is able to pay, that is as far as his means will allow; and, therefore,
if his property is equal in amount to the dowry, judgment shall be
rendered against him for the whole; but if it is less, he shall be made
to pay as much as he can. A claim for the restitution of a dowry is
subject to retention; on account of expenses incurred with reference to
the property included in said dowry, for the reason that a dowry is
diminished by operation of law because of necessary expenses, as may be
ascertained from the more extensive Books of the Digest.

\(38) When anyone brings an action against his ascendant or his patron,
or when one partner brings suit against another in the action of
partnership, the plaintiff can not recover more than his adversary is
able to pay; and the rule is the same where suit was brought against
anyone by reason of a gift bestowed by him.

\(39) Set-offs made by both parties often bring it about that one of
them receives less than he is entitled to, for according to what is just
and equitable an account is taken of what the plaintiff should for his
part pay with reference to the same matter, and the party against whom
suit is brought, as has already been stated, is required to pay the
remainder.

\(40) Also, when he who has surrendered his property to his creditors
has afterwards acquired something which yields a substantial profit, his
creditors can again proceed against him for whatever he may be able to
pay; for it would be inhuman for a man who had already been deprived of
his fortune to be condemned in the entire amount.

TITLE VII.

CONCERNING BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS ENTERED INTO WITH A PERSON UNDER THE
CONTROL OF ANOTHER.

For the reason that We have treated above of the action which may be
brought for the *peculium* of children of a family and of slaves, We
must now explain more in detail the character of the said action as well
as of others which are ordinarily granted against parents or masters in
the name of the said persons. And because the principles are almost the
same whether the business be transacted with slaves or with those who
are under the control of their relatives; hence, in order to avoid a
tedious dissertation, We shall direct Our inquiry to the relation of
slave and master, with the understanding that the same principles will
also apply to children and to the parents under whose control they are;
for if there is anything special to be mentioned respecting them We
shall explain it separately.

\(1) If then any business has been transacted with a slave by the order
of his master, the Prætor promises an action for the entire amount
against the master; evidently because he who makes a contract of this
kind seems to have relied upon the credit of the master.

\(2) Under the same rule the Prætor promises two other actions for the
entire amount, one of which is called "exercitorian" and the other
"institorian". The first is available when anyone has appointed his
slave the master of a ship, and some contract has been made with him
concerning the transaction which he was appointed to attend to. The
action is called exercitorian because the party to whom the daily
profits of a ship belong is styled *exercitor*. The *actio institoria*
is applicable where anyone has appointed his slave to have charge of a
shop or a business of any description, and a contract has been made with
him concerning the matters of which he has charge, and it is called
"institorian" for the reason that persons appointed to carry on a
business are designated *institores*. The Prætor, however, allows these
two actions also where anyone appoints a freeman or the slave of another
person to take charge of a ship, a shop, or any kind of business,
evidently because the same principle of equity likewise prevails in this
instance.

\(3) The Prætor has also introduced another action which is known as
"tributorian". For if a slave transacting business with goods which are
a part of his own *peculium*, his master being aware of the fact, and
any contract is entered into with him by reason of the same, the Prætor
has established the rule that everything belonging to said merchandise
and whatever profit accrues from it, shall be divided between

the master, if anything is owing to him, and the other creditors in
proportion to their claims. And for the reason that he entrusts the
distribution to the master himself, if any one of the creditors makes
complaint that what has been allotted to him is less than it should be,
he grants to this creditor the action styled "tributorian".

\(4) Moreover, an action has been introduced which has reference to the
*peculium* and to whatever has been employed for the benefit of the
master; so that even if the business had been transacted without the
master's consent, nevertheless, if anything had been employed for the
benefit of the latter he will be obliged to account for the whole of it;
but if nothing has been employed for his benefit he will still be
required to make payment to the extent of his *peculium*. Everything
which a slave necessarily expends on the property of his master is
understood to have been done for his benefit; for example, where he has
borrowed money and with it has paid his master's creditors, or repaired
his buildings which were falling into ruin, or purchased grain for his
family, or bought a tract of land, or anything else that was necessary.
Therefore, for instance, if out of ten *aurei* which your slave borrowed
from Titius he paid five to your creditor and expended the other five in
any other way, you should have judgment rendered against you for the
entire amount of the last five, but for the other five only to the
extent of the *peculium* from which it is apparent that if the entire
ten *aurei *have been expended for your benefit, Titius can recover all
of them; for although there is but one kind of action for the recovery
of the *peculium *and whatever has been expended for the benefit of the
master, it has, nevertheless, two judgments. Therefore the judge before
whom the action is brought should previously ascertain whether anything
has been employed for the benefit of the master, and he can only proceed
to the estimation of the amount of the *peculium* after he has learned
that nothing, or less than the entire amount, has been employed in this
way.

When, however, inquiry is made with reference to the amount of the
*peculium*, anything which the slave owes to his master or to anyone
under his control is first deducted, and the remainder is considered to
be *peculium*. Sometimes, however, what a slave owes to a person under
the control of his master is not deducted from the *peculium;* for
example, when he forms a part of his own *peculium;* which signifies
that deduction is not made from the same where the slave is indebted to
one of his own slaves.

\(5) However, there is no doubt that he who has entered into a contract
by the order of his master and in whose behalf the institorian or
exercitorian action will lie, can also bring the action relating to
property employed for the benefit of the master. Still, he would be
extremely foolish if he failed to bring the suit by means of which he
can with the greatest ease recover the entire amount under the contract,
and attempt the difficult undertaking of proving that the property has
been employed for the benefit of the master, or that the slave has such
*a* valuable *peculium* that the entire amount can be paid to him out of
the same.

Moreover, he who is entitled to the tributorian action can likewise
bring the *actio de peculio et in rem verso;* but sometimes it is
evidently expedient for him to bring the *tributoria actio* and at
others the *actio de peculio et in rem verso*. It is to his advantage to
bring the tributorian action because in doing so the condition of the
master is not rendered preferable, that is, what is owing to him is not
deducted, but he enjoys the same rights as the other creditors; but in
the action on the *peculium* whatever is due to the master is first
deducted and the latter is condemned to pay the balance to the creditor.

Again, under other circumstances it may be advantageous to bring the
*actio de peculio* for the reason that in it an account is taken of the
entire *peculium*, and in the tributorian action it is taken only of
what is used in business; and anyone can carry on commercial
transactions with a third part of the *peculium*, or possibly with a
fourth, or even with a very little, and keep the greater portion in land
and slaves, or in money loaned at interest. Therefore anyone should
choose either one of these actions or the other, according as it may be
deemed expedient; but it is evident that he should bring the *actio de
in rem verso* where he can prove that the money has been used for his
master's benefit.

\(6) What We have stated with reference to a slave and his master We
understand to apply to a son and a daughter, a grandson and a
granddaughter, and the father or the grandfather under whose control
they may be.

\(7) The following especially applies to the former, namely, that the
Macedonian decree of the Senate forbids money to be loaned to those who
are under the control of their relatives; and an action is denied to a
creditor who makes a loan to a son or a daughter, a grandson or a
granddaughter themselves (whether they are still under paternal control,
or whether by the death of their ascendant or by emancipation they have
become their own masters); or against the father or grandfather, whether
he still has them under his control, or has emancipated them. The Senate
established this rule for the reason that parties burdened with debts
for borrowed money which they had squandered in luxury, often plotted
against the lives of their relatives.

\(8) In conclusion, we must observe that when a contract has been
entered into by the order of a father or a master, or when any property
has been used for his benefit, a personal action for recovery can be
brought against the father or master directly, just as if the business
had been transacted with him as principal. It is also held that he
against whom an exercitorian or an institorian action can be brought is
liable to a personal action for recovery, because a contract of this
kind is also understood to be entered into by his order.

TITLE VIII. CONCERNING NOXAL ACTIONS.

Noxal actions have been established for the offenses of slaves, for
instance, where they have committed theft, robbery with violence,
damage, or injury, by means of which action the master, if he loses, is
permitted to pay the amount of the damage or to surrender the slave who
has caused the injury.

\(1) *Noxa* is the object responsible for the damage, that is to say,
the slave; *noxia* is the illegal act itself, as, for instance, the
theft, damage, robbery, or injury.

\(2) Permission to discharge the liability incurred through an illegal
act by the surrender of whatever was responsible for the same is
consonant with the highest dictates of reason; for it is unjust that the
wickedness of slaves should be injurious to their master beyond what
their own bodies are worth.

\(3) A master who has been sued on account of his slave in an action of
this kind is released from liability by the surrender of the slave as
the cause of the damage, and the ownership of the latter is perpetually
transferred from the master; but if the said slave obtains money and
makes reparation to him to whom he has been surrendered, he will be
manumitted with the assistance of the Prætor, even though his master may
be unwilling.

\(4) Noxal actions have been provided either by statute or by the Edict
of the Prætor; by statute, for instance, by the action of theft under a
law of the Twelve Tables; by a suit for wrongful damage under the *Lex
Aquilia;* and by the Edict of the Prætor, as the actions for injuries
and robbery with violence.

\(5) Moreover, every noxal action follows the person, for if your slave
has committed a noxal offense, the action lies against you as long as he
is under your control; but if he should come under the control of
another, the action at once begins to lie against the latter; or if he
should be manumitted, he himself, becomes directly liable and the right
of surrender for the illegal act is extinguished. On the other hand, a
direct action may be transformed into a noxal one; for where a freeman
has committed a wrongful act and afterwards becomes your slave  which
We explained in the First Book may take place under certain
circumstances  the action which formerly was direct and against the
culprit becomes noxal and against you.

\(6) Where a slave has committed a noxal offence against his master no
cause of action arises, for no obligation can exist between a master and
one who is under his control. Therefore, although a slave may have come
under the control of another, or have been manumitted, no action lies
either against himself or against the party under whose control he now
is. For this reason where a slave belonging to another has committed a
noxal act against you, and afterwards comes under your control, the
right of action is extinguished, for the reason that it is brought into
such a condition that it cannot be maintained, and

therefore although the slave may pass out of your power, you cannot
bring the suit; just as where a master has committed an offence against
his own slave, for the latter can have no right of action against his
master, even if he should be manumitted or alienated.

\(7) The ancients permitted these principles to be applied also to sons
and daughters under parental control. Modern social conditions, however,
have very justly determined that this severity should be rejected, so
that it has entirely disappeared from ordinary practice; for who would
allow his son, and especially his daughter, to be surrendered to another
party by way of reparation for damage; since the father would be more
exposed to bodily suffering than the son himself, while, where daughters
are concerned common decency excludes their surrender? Therefore it has
been held that noxal actions can only be brought in the case of slaves,
as we find that it is often stated by ancient commentators on the laws
that children under parental control can themselves be sued for any
offences which they have committed.

TITLE IX.

WHERE A QUADRUPED Is SAID TO HAVE CAUSED DAMAGE.

A noxal action was established by a law of the Twelve Tables where
animals destitute of reason have committed any damage in play, or
through anger or savageness; and when such animals are surrendered as an
equivalent for the damage, they benefit the defendant by releasing him
from liability, for the reason that it is so stated by the Law of the
Twelve Tables; for example, where a horse known to be vicious kicks
anyone, or an ox which is accustomed to do so attacks anyone with his
horns. This action is applicable where the animals are irritated
contrary to their natural disposition, but if their ferocity is born in
them there is no cause of action; hence where a bear escapes from his
owner and causes damage, the latter is not liable, because he ceased to
be the owner when the wild beast escaped. Damage of this kind is such as
is committed without malicious intent by whatever causes it; for an
animal cannot be said to commit a wrongful injury, since it is destitute
of reason. These are the matters which have reference to the noxal
action.

\(1) It must, however, be noted that by the Edict of the Ædile we are
forbidden to have a dog, a tame or a wild boar, a bear, or a lion, in
any common highway, and if this provision is violated and any freeman is
said to have been injured, the owner may be condemned to pay such a sum
as appears to the judge to be just and equitable, and double the amount
of the damage caused to property. In addition to these Ædilian actions
one *de pauperie *will lie; for actions are concurrent, especially those
that are penal, when they relate to the same thing, and the use of one
never prevents the institution of another.

TITLE X. CONCERNING THOSE BY WHOM WE CAN BRING SUIT.

We must now remember that any man can bring a suit either in his own
name, or in that of another. He brings one in the name of another when,
for instance, he is acting as agent, guardian, or curator; although in
former times it was not customary for a man to bring suit in the name of
another, except where he was acting for the public, or in favor of
freedom, or as a guardian. Moreover, by the *Lex Hostilia* it was
permissible to bring an action of theft in the name of parties who were
in the hands of the enemy, or were absent on public business, or in
behalf of persons of either sex who were under the guardianship of those
previously mentioned; and for the reason that it was not permitted
either to sue or be sued in the name of another, and this resulted in no
little inconvenience, men began to litigate by means of agents; for
disease, age, and necessary journeys, as well as numerous other causes,
frequently prevent men from being able to transact their own business
personally.

\(1) An agent is not appointed by any certain words, nor while the
adverse party is present, in fact he is usually appointed without his
knowledge; for when you permit anyone to bring or defend a suit for you,
he is understood to be your agent.^1^

\(2) It has been explained in the First Book in what way guardians and
curators are appointed.

TITLE XI. CONCERNING THE GIVING OP SECURITY.

One method of giving security was established in ancient times; modern
practice has adopted another. For formerly, where an action *in rem* was
brought, the possessor of the property was obliged to furnish security,
and if he was beaten and did not surrender the property itself or pay
its appraised value, power was granted to the plaintiff to proceed
either against him or his sureties. This species of security was styled
*judicatum solvi;* and it is easy to understand why it was so called,
for the party stipulated that whatever was decided by the judgment
should be paid to him.

Still more was the defendant in an action *in rem* required to give
security if he joined issue in the name of another; but where the

^1^ As previously stated, the *procurator*, or agent of the plaintiff
who transacted his business in court, was rather an attorney in fact,
than an attorney at law. Once made, his appointment by his principal,
the *dominus litis*  so called because he often appeared in his own
behalf  could not be revoked except for most cogent reasons and after
proper cause had been shown; nor could the *procurator* relinquish the
charge after it had once been accepted. By joining issue, the latter
made the suit his own and assumed the liability of his principal,
although he was theoretically only his representative. He might even
voluntarily proceed with the management of the case, provided he
furnished security that his principal would ratify his acts. Anyone
physically able, and not laboring under some legal disability, could
perform the duties of *procurator*.  ED.

plaintiff in an action *in rem* brought suit in his own name he was not
compelled to give security; although where an agent brought an action
*in rem* he was ordered to give security that his principal would ratify
his acts; as there was danger that the principal might himself bring
suit again for the same thing. Guardians and curators in compliance with
the terms of the Edict were obliged to furnish security just as agents
did, but sometimes the obligation to furnish it was not enforced when
they were plaintiffs. These rules were only applicable where actions *in
rem* were brought.

\(1) Where, however, the action was *in personam*, the same rules were
available against the plaintiff that We have mentioned with reference to
the action *in rem;* with respect to the defendant, however, where
anyone appeared in the name of another, he was compelled in every
instance, to provide security, for the reason that no one is deemed
qualified to defend another without giving security; but if anyone
joined issue in his own name he was not compelled to furnish security to
pay the judgment.

\(2) Now, however, matters are conducted differently; for when anyone is
sued in his own name, whether the action be *in rem* or *in personam,
*he is not obliged to furnish security for the value of the property in
question, but only for his own person, that is to say that he will
remain in court until the termination of the case; and this is effected
by his giving a promise and at the same time taking an oath, (which is
called juratory security), or he is forced to give his bare promise, or
security according to his rank and position.

\(3) But where an action has been brought or defended by an agent; or he
acts as plaintiff, and his authority has not been recorded, or the
actual principal in the case has not confirmed the appointment of his
representative in court, the latter will be compelled to furnish
security that his principal will ratify his acts; and the same rule
shall be observed where a guardian, a curator, or other persons of this
kind who have taken charge of the affairs of others, bring suit against
any parties by another.

\(4) But where anyone is sued, if he is present and ready to appoint an
agent, he can either himself come into court and confirm the authority
of his agent in person by formally stipulating to pay the amount of the
judgment, or he can give security out of court, by means of which he
himself with reference to all the clauses of the bond, becomes the
surety of his agent, to pay the amount of the judgment. And by this he
is compelled to encumber all his property, whether he has given his
promise in court or furnished security out of court, so that both he and
his heirs may be bound; and, in addition to this, he must find security
or furnish a bond for his own person, that is to say that he will be
present in court when judgment is to be rendered, or that if he should
not appear his surety will pay the amount of the judgment unless an
appeal should be taken.

\(5) Where, however, the defendant for some reason or other does not
appear, and another party is willing to conduct the defence, he can do
so (and no distinction exists between actions *in rem*, and *in per-*

*sonam);* provided always that he furnishes security for payment of the
judgment, in proportion to the value of the property in litigation; for
in accordance with the ancient rule, (as has already been stated) no one
is deemed to be qualified to conduct the defence of another where
security is not given.

\(6) All these things are more clearly and more thoroughly comprehended
from the daily practice of the courts, and from the documents themselves
relative to transactions therein.

\(7) We decree that these rules shall prevail not only in this royal
city, but also in all Our provinces, although on account of inexperience
other modes of procedure were perhaps formerly used; since it is
necessary for all the provinces to follow the practice which is observed
in the Capital of all Our states, that is to say, in this royal city.

TITLE XII.

CONCERNING PERPETUAL AND TEMPORARY ACTIONS,

AND THOSE THAT ARE TRANSMITTED TO,

AND AGAINST HEIRS.

In this place We must bear in mind that those actions which proceed from
a law, a decree of the Senate, or the Sacred Constitutions, could be
brought at any time according to the practice of antiquity, until the
Sacred Constitutions imposed certain limitations upon actions, not only
those *in rem* but also those *in personam;* while such as arise from
the special jurisdiction of the Prætor, can as a rule be brought within
a year, (as the authority of the Prætor ordinarily endured for that
period). Sometimes, however, they were extended *in perpetuum*, that is
up to the limit introduced by the constitutions; and these are the ones
which the Prætor concedes to the possessor of an estate and to the
others who occupy the place of heirs. The action of manifest theft also,
though it arises from the jurisdiction of the Præt-

or himself, is, nevertheless, granted in perpetuity; for he considered
it absurd that it should be terminated at the end of a year.

\(1) Not all actions, however, which can be brought against anyone
either under statutory enactment or by the Edict of the Prætor, are
equally applicable or can be granted against the heir; for a most
positive rule of law exists that penal actions growing out of crimes are
not maintainable against an heir, as, for example, those of theft, of
robbery by violence, of injury, or wrongful damage; but actions of this
kind are maintainable by the heir and are not denied him, with the
exception of that of injury and any other which may be found to resemble
it. Sometimes, however, an action arising out of a contract does not lie
against an heir, where a testator acted fraudulently and no benefit
resulted to the heir from the fraud. The penal actions, however, which
We mentioned above, where they have been conducted by their principals
in person until issue has been joined, are granted to the heirs, and are
transmitted against the heirs.

\(2) It remains for Us to notify you that if before a decision is
rendered the defendant satisfies the plaintiff, it is the duty of the
judge to discharge him, even though at the time of joinder of issue he
was in such a position that he should have been condemned; and from this
arose the vulgar saying, "that all actions in court are subject to
dismissal".

TITLE XIII. CONCERNING EXCEPTIONS.

Next in order, let us examine exceptions. Exceptions are instituted for
the sake of protecting those against whom suits are brought; for it
often happens that although the action brought by the plaintiff is just,
still it is unjust as against the defendant.

\(1) For example, if compelled by fear, induced by fraud, or laboring
under a mistake, you have, in stipulating with Titius, promised him
something that you did not owe him, it is evident that you have rendered
yourself liable by the Civil Law, and that the suit which he brings
against you by which it is alleged that you should give him the property
is valid; but it is unjust that you should have judgment rendered
against you; and therefore the exception on the ground of fear, or
fraud, or one suitable to the case, is granted you in order to contest
his action.

\(2) The same rule applies where anyone has stipulated for money under
the pretext of making a loan, but does not do so; for it is certain that
he can bring suit against you for the money as you are obliged to pay
it, since you are liable under a stipulation; but because it is unjust
for you to be condemned under such circumstances, it is established that
you should defend yourself by the exception on the ground of
non-payment. By one of Our Constitutions We have placed a limit upon the
time for doing this, as We have already stated in preceding

Books.

\(3) Moreover, a debtor, even if he had not made an agreement with his
creditor that he should not be sued by him, is, nevertheless, liable,
because obligations are not in any respect dissolved by entering into an
agreement; for which reason an action in which the plaintiff alleges,
"that if it appears that the defendant should pay him", can be
maintained against the debtor; but as it is unjust that he should have
judgment rendered against him in opposition to the agreement, he can
protect himself by the exception *pacti conventi*.

\(4) A debtor also remains bound although, on the demand of the creditor
he may have sworn that he ought not to pay anything; but for the reason
that it is unjust to make an investigation with respect to his perjury,
he protects himself by the exception on the ground of an oath. In
actions *in rem *exceptions are also necessary; as, for instance, where
on application of the plaintiff the possessor has sworn that the
property is his own, and nevertheless the plaintiff still demands it;
for although what he states may be true, that is, that the property
belongs to him, still it is unjust that the possessor should be
condemned.

\(5) Moreover, if suit has been brought against you, either *in rem *or
*in personam*, the obligation still continues, and therefore by strict
construction of the law another action can be brought against you
afterwards for the same cause, but you should be aided by the exception
*rei judicatæ*.

\(6) These statements are sufficient for the sake of example, but on the
other hand how exceptions may be necessary in many and various
occurrences can be ascertained from the greater volumes of the Digest or
Pandects.

\(7) Some of these derive their force from laws or statutes having the
effect of laws, or arise from the jurisdiction of the Prætor himself.

\(8) Moreover, exceptions are styled either perpetual and peremptory, or
temporary and dilatory.

\(9) Perpetual and peremptory exceptions are those which always oppose
the plaintiffs, and always permanently dispose of the subject of the
action; such as those of fraud, duress, and agreement; when it has been
agreed that no demand whatever shall be made for the money.

\(10) Temporary and dilatory exceptions are those which have a
prohibitory effect for a time and procure a temporary delay; such is the
exception *pacti conventi*, when it has been agreed that no action shall
be brought within a certain time, as, for instance, within five years;
for at the end of that period the plaintiff is not prevented from
recovering the property. Therefore the exception *pacti conventi*, or
one resembling it, is interposed against those who wish to bring suit
within that time, and they ought to defer their action and bring it
afterwards; therefore exceptions of this kind are called dilatory.
Otherwise, if they brought suit within said time, and the exception was
interposed, they were unable to gain anything in that action on account
of the exception, nor could they formerly sue after the specified time,
for since they had rashly brought the case into court and neglected it,
they lost the property for this reason. Now, however, We have determined
that matters shall not be conducted so strictly, and have decided that
when anyone has ventured to bring suit before the time established by
the agreement or obligation, he is subject to the Constitution of Zeno
which that most revered legislator promulgated concerning those who
brought suit for too much with reference to time, so that when the
plaintiff treats with contempt the delay which he himself had
voluntarily granted, or which is implied by the nature of the action,
those who have suffered such an injury shall be entitled to double the
time; and after it has elapsed they shall not be liable to another
action unless they have previously received all the expenses of the
former one; in order that plaintiffs, alarmed by such a penalty, may be
taught to observe the times for bringing actions.

\(11) Moreover, there are dilatory exceptions with reference to the
person; and such are those that relate to agents, as, for instance,
where anyone wishes to bring suit by a soldier, or a woman, for soldiers
are not permitted to appear as agents either of a father, a

mother or a wife, and not even under an Imperial Rescript; but they can
transact their own business without committing a breach of discipline.

\(12) With reference to those exceptions which in former times were
pleaded against agents on account of the infamy of him who appointed
them or of themselves, We, having noticed that they were by no means
frequently offered in court, have decreed that they shall be abrogated,
lest the discussion of the principal point at issue be delayed while
they are being argued.

TITLE XIV.

CONCERNING REPLICATIONS.

It sometimes happens that an exception, which at first sight seems to be
just, has an iniquitous effect. When this happens another allegation is
required for the purpose of aiding the plaintiff; and this is called a
replication, because by means of it the force of the exception is
repelled and annulled. For instance, where anyone has agreed with his
debtor not to bring suit against him for the money, and afterwards they
have both entered into a contrary agreement, that is that the creditor
may be permitted to bring suit; and if he does so and the debtor files
the exception, that he ought not to be condemned where there was no
agreement that the creditor should not institute legal proceedings to
collect the money, the exception prejudices the creditor, (for it was so
agreed and still remains in force although they afterwards entered into
an agreement to the contrary); but for the reason that it is unjust that
the creditor should be deprived of what is due to him, a replication
shall be granted him by reason of the subsequent agreement.

\(1) Again, it sometimes happens that a replication which at first sight
seems just, operates iniquitously; and when this happens another
allegation is required for the purpose of aiding the defendant; which is
styled a duplication.

\(2) And if again this at first sight seems just, but for some reason or
other prejudices the plaintiff, still another allegation is required by
which the plaintiff may be assisted; and this is called a triplication.

\(3) The multiplicity of business transactions has at times brought
about the employment of all these exceptions, to a greater extent than
We have stated; but it is easy to better ascertain what they all are
from the more comprehensive work of the Digest.

\(4) The exceptions by which the debtor is defended are for the most
part also granted to his sureties, and justly so; because what they are
sued for is considered to be demanded from the debtor himself, since by
an action of mandate he is compelled to reimburse them for what they
have paid for him. For which reason if anyone makes an agreement with
his debtor that he will not bring suit for payment, it has been
established that those who have obligated themselves for

the former shall also have the benefit of the exception *pacti
conventi;* just as if the agreement not to sue them for the money had
been entered into with them personally. Certain exceptions, however, are
not ordinarily granted in favor of sureties; as, for instance, where a
debtor has made an assignment of his property and his creditor has
entered suit against him, he is protected by the exception *nisi bonis
cesserit;* but this exception is not granted to sureties, evidently
because he who binds others for his debtor looks principally to the fact
that, if the debtor should lose his property, he may be able to obtain
whatever he is entitled to from those whom he has caused to assume the
obligation for him.

TITLE XV. CONCERNING INTERDICTS.

Next in order We shall consider interdicts, or the actions which are
introduced in their stead. Interdicts were certain formularies by which
the Prætor either ordered some act to be performed, or forbade it; and
this he was especially accustomed to do when a controversy between
parties with reference to possession or quasi-possession arose.

\(1) The principal division of interdicts is the following, namely: they
are either prohibitory, restitutory, or exhibitory. Those that are
prohibitory are any by which the Prætor forbids some act to be
performed; as, for instance, the employment of force against a party who
has indisputable possession; or against one who is carrying a corpse
into a place where he had a right to take it; or one who is erecting a
building on consecrated ground; or who is committing any act in a public
stream, or upon its bank, whereby its navigation may be obstructed.

Restitutory interdicts are those by which he orders something to be
surrendered; for example, when he directs possession to be restored to
the rightful possessor of property belonging to an estate, which someone
is holding as heir or as possessor; or when he orders possession of a
field to be restored to a party who has been forcibly deprived of the
same.

Exhibitory interdicts are those by which he orders something to be
produced, for example, when the liberty of anyone is involved, as that
of a freedman whose services are demanded by his patron, or the
production of children in the presence of their relatives under whose
control they are is required. There are those, however, who are of the
opinion that only interdicts that are prohibitory should properly be
thus named, because to interdict is to notify and prohibit; and that
restitutory and exhibitory interdicts should be, strictly speaking,
styled decrees; but it has been the practice to designate them all
interdicts for the reason that they are referred to as between two
parties.

\(2) The next division of interdicts is this, namely, that some are
instituted for the purpose of obtaining possession, others for retaining
it, and others again for recovering it.

\(3) An interdict for the purpose of obtaining possession which is
called *quorum bonorum*, can be employed by the legal possessor of an
estate; and its force and power are such that anyone is compelled to
restore property which he holds as heir or possessor, the possession of
which has been transferred to another.

A man is considered to be in possession as heir when he believes himself
to be an heir; and to hold as possessor when he has possession of an
entire estate or any portion of the same, being aware that it does not
belong to him. The interdict is therefore said to be for the obtaining
of possession because it is only useful to him who now, for the first
time, is attempting to obtain possession of an estate; and, therefore,
if anyone after having gained possession afterwards loses it, this
interdict is of no advantage to him.

There is also an interdict, which is called *Salvianum*, instituted for
the purpose of recovering possession, and which the owner of land makes
use of to obtain the property of a tenant which the latter has pledged
as security for the rent.

\(4) The interdicts *Uti Possidetis* and *Utrubi* are available for the
purpose of retaining possession when there is a dispute between both
parties concerning the ownership of property, and the first question
that arises is as to which of the litigants should be the possessor and
which of them should bring suit. For, unless it is first established
which of them is entitled to possession, the action for recovery cannot
be instituted, because both civil and natural law declare that one party
should have possession and that the other should bring suit against him
as possessor; and because it is much more advantageous to have
possession than to bring suit, therefore, for the most part and indeed
almost always, a great contest arises for the actual possession. The
advantage of possession is as follows, that even though the property in
dispute does not belong to him who holds it, still, if the plaintiff
cannot prove that it is his, the possession remains undisturbed; for
which reason when the rights of the two parties are not clear, judgment
is usually rendered against the plaintiff.^1^

The interdict *Uti Possidetis* is available with reference to the
possession of land or buildings, that of *Utrubi* with reference to the
possession of movable property. The force and effect of both of these
differed exceedingly among the ancients; for by means of the interdict
*Uti Possidetis *he prevailed who had possession at the time of the
interdict, provided he had obtained possession as against his adversary
neither by violence, nor secretly, nor by tolerance; although he might
have driven out another by violence, or clandestinely deprived another
party of possession, or entreated someone that he would permit him to
keep possession; but under the interdict *Utrubi* he was successful who,
during the greater part of that year had possession neither by force,
nor secretly, nor by tolerance, as against his adversary.

At present, however, the practice is otherwise; for the effect of both
interdicts is the same so far as possession is concerned, whether

^1^ "*Melior est conditio possidentis et rei quam actoris.*"  ED.

real or personal property is involved, so that he is successful who, at
the time of the joinder of issue retains possession as against his
adversary neither by force, nor secretly, nor through tolerance.

\(5) Moreover, a man is considered a possessor not only when he himself
holds the property, but also when anyone else has possession in his
name, although he may not be under his control, as a tenant of land or
the renter of a house. Anyone is also considered to be in possession
through those with whom he has deposited or to whom he has lent
something; and this is meant when it is said that "anyone can retain
possession through a party who holds possession in his name". Besides,
it is settled that possession is also retained by intention, that is,
that although a party himself may not be in possession, nor another in
his name, he still is deemed to retain possession of the property if he
leaves it, not with the intention of abandoning it, but with the
expectation of afterwards returning thither. We have explained in the
Second Book through what persons anyone can obtain possession, and there
is no doubt that no one can gain possession by intention alone.

\(6) It is customary to allow an interdict for the recovery of
possession where anyone has been ejected by force from land or from a
building, for the interdict *unde vi* is provided for him, by which the
party who ejected him is forced to restore possession to him, even
though the latter acquired possession either by force, or secretly, or
by indulgence from him who forcibly ejected him. However, according to
certain Sacred Constitutions, as We have mentioned above, where anyone
seizes property by force he is deprived of the ownership of the same,
even if it be a part of his own goods; but if it belongs to someone else
he is compelled, after making restitution of the same, to also pay its
value to the party who was subjected to the violence. He who has
forcibly ejected anyone from possession is also liable under the *Lex
Julia "de vi privata aut de vi publica*", for force employed privately
and without arms, but when he has deprived the party in possession by
using weapons he is liable for public violence. By the term "arms", we
understand not only shields, swords, and helmets to be meant, but also
clubs and stones.

\(7) A third division of interdicts is that they are either simple or
double. The simple ones are, for instance, where one party is plaintiff
and the other defendant, and to this class belong all restitutory and
exhibitory interdicts; for the plaintiff is the one who desires that
something may be either produced or restored, and the defendant is he
from whom the production or restoration is demanded.

Some prohibitory interdicts, however, are simple and some are double.
Simple ones, are, for example, when the Prætor forbids some act to be
committed in a sacred place, or in a public stream or on its bank, for
the plaintiff is he who desires that the act be not committed, and the
defendant is he who attempts to commit it. Interdicts are double, for
instance, such as the *Uti Possidetis* and *Utrubi;* and they are called
double because the condition of each litigant in them is the same, and
that neither is considered to be especially defendant or

plaintiff, but each takes the part of defendant and plaintiff at the
same time.

\(8) It is superfluous to discuss at present the classification and
force of interdicts in former times, for whenever the law prescribes an
extraordinary method of procedure (and all suits are now of this
description) it is not necessary for an interdict to be issued, but
judgment is rendered without interdicts, just as if an equitable action
had been granted by reason of an interdict.^1^

^1^ The interdict of the Roman law was the prototype and precursor of
the modern injunction, and also bears a considerable resemblance to the
writ of mandamus. The derivation of the term is said to be from the
clause indicating the character of the process "*Quod interim dicitur".
*It was an "extraordinary" proceeding, that is one not authorized by the
Civil or Common Law, but derived from the equitable jurisdiction of the
Prætor, whereby he rendered a decision, without referring the case to an
*arbiter* or *judex* for the purpose of determining questions of fact.
The interdict was issued when a violation of personal or property rights
seemed to be imminent and demanded the summary and effective
intervention of the magistrate.

While interdicts were applicable to almost every conceivable matter in
which the preservation of sacred and profane property, public, private,
real, or personal, was concerned, as well as to the rights of corporate
bodies and individuals in their relations to one another and to society
in general, their principal exercise appears to have been directed to
the acquisition, maintenance, and recovery of possession. They belonged
to the intermediate period of Roman jurisprudence, and after the
abolition of the Formulary System their place was supplied by
proceedings which were, to all intents and purposes, actions at law, but
whose legal application and consequences were the same as those of the
interdict.

The interdict, unlike the injunction, was not always accompanied by a
penalty for non-compliance where private interests were involved. To
prohibitory interdicts, however, this rule did not apply, as, when they
were granted, a *sponsio*, or forfeit was invariably deposited as
security by both litigants, and was lost to his adversary by the party
who failed to prove his case.

The principal interest at present attaching to the interdict, is the
fact that those included in the class of "exhibitory", and known as *De
libero homine exhibendo* and *De liberis exhibendis item ducendis*, are
the undoubted source from which our writ of *Habeas Corpus* is derived.
Although the Romans were the largest slaveholders of ancient or modern
times, no nation has ever guarded the liberties of its citizens with
such constant and diligent care. The benefit of every doubt, the effect
of every presumption, was conceded in favor of freedom. Where a person
who asserted that he was free was held in slavery, anyone might apply
for an order to produce him in court for the purpose of establishing the
fact. "*Quem liberum hominem dolo malo retines, exhibeas.*" So stringent
was the rule, that the party interested  even if he preferred to remain
in bondage  could not reject the advantage conferred by the Edict, and
do so, but was liberated in spite of himself. The existence of fraud and
malice was essential, hence the proceeding was not applicable to persons
under paternal control who were subject to the rights of ascendants. The
question of freedom was the only one to be considered, where it was
evident that the claim was unfounded, the action prescribed for that
purpose might be brought to determine the civil status of the individual
concerned. A creditor could not employ this interdict to produce his
debtor.

The interdict *De liberis exhibendis item ducendis* enabled children and
wives to be brought before the Prætor when their interests seemed to
demand it. While proper cause must be shown in cases alleged to involve
the liberty of a freeman, no such formality was permitted where the
production of children was applied for, the order being unqualified and
peremptory. If service was made upon a father of ill repute by some one
claiming a right to have the child produced in court, a guardian was
appointed to take charge of it until the case was heard.  ED.

TITLE XVI. CONCERNING THE PENALTY FOR RECKLESS LITIGATION.

We must now bear in mind that those who formulated our laws exercised
great care lest men should be too easily involved in litigation; and
this likewise is Our object. This result can best be accomplished by
restraining the rashness of plaintiffs or defendants, either by a
pecuniary penalty, or by the religious character of an oath, or by the
fear of infamy.

\(1) For example, an oath is required of all parties sued by the terms
of one of Our Constitutions, for a defendant cannot employ his
allegations unless he has first sworn that he is defending himself
because he thinks he has good grounds for doing so. In certain instances
the action is for double or treble damages against defendants who make
denial; as, for instance, where a suit is instituted for wrongful damage
or for legacies bequeathed to places which are held in reverence. An
action can also be brought in the first place for more than simple
damages, as, for instance, that of fourfold for manifest theft, or for
double for non-manifest theft; for in these cases and in certain others
the action is brought for more than simple damages whether the party
denies or admits that he is liable.

Moreover, proceedings instituted for the purpose of annoyance by the
plaintiff are repressed; for he also is compelled by one of Our
Constitutions to take an oath against such methods; and the advocates of
each party must submit to take the oath prescribed by another of Our
Constitutions. All these proceedings have been introduced instead of the
ancient action of calumny, which has fallen into disuse, because it
imposed a fine of a tenth part of the property in controversy upon the
plaintiff, and We find that this was never required; so instead of these
proceedings the aforesaid oath has been introduced, together with the
rule that an unprincipled party shall be forced to pay his adversary the
damage he has sustained and the costs of the suit.

\(2) In some kinds of actions the parties condemned became infamous; as,
for example, in the action of theft, robbery with violence, injury,
fraud, and also in direct actions involving guardianship, mandate, and
deposit, but not in contrary actions; and also in the action of
partnership which is direct irrespective of the partner bringing it, and
on this account either of the partners will be branded with ignominy if
a decision is rendered against him. But in the action of theft, or of
robbery with violence, or of injury or fraud, not only are the parties
who lose the case branded with ignominy, but also those who have
compromised, and justly so; for a great difference exists where anyone
is a debtor on account of a crime or because of a contract.

\(3) The order to be followed in instituting any action is based upon
that part of the Edict in which the Prætor gives instructions for
bringing the parties into court; for unquestionably the first thing to
be done is for the adversary to be summoned, that is to say, to be
called before him who is to interpret the law. And in the part afore-

said the Prætor concedes this right to parents and patrons, as well as
to the children of parents and patrons, of both sexes, that their
children or freedmen shall not be suffered to bring them into court
unless they have asked and obtained permission to do this from the
Prætor himself; and if anyone should summon them otherwise, he sentences
him to pay a fine of fifty *solidi*.

TITLE XVII. CONCERNING THE DUTY OF A JUDGE.

It remains for us to consider the duty of a judge; and, in the first
place, a judge ought to be careful not to decide in any other way than
is prescribed by the laws, the constitutions or the customs.

\(1) Therefore, if a judge has been appointed to try a noxal action, he
must, where the master appears to him to be liable, be careful to render
his decision in the following terms: "I condemn Publius Mævius to pay
ten *aurei* to Lucius Titius, or to surrender the slave in satisfaction
of the damage."

\(2) And if the action is *in rem* and he decides against the plaintiff,
he ought to discharge the possessor; or if he decides against the
possessor, he should order him to restore the property along with the
profits of the same. But if the possessor says that he cannot restore
the property at present, and appears to ask for time in order to make
restitution without any indication of deception, indulgence must be
shown him, provided, however, that he gives security by furnishing a
surety for the value of the property in litigation if he should not make
restitution within the time granted him.

Where suit is brought for an estate, the same rules apply with respect
to the profits which We have stated are applicable in one brought for a
single piece of property. Almost the same account is taken in both
actions with reference to those profits which the possessor did not
collect through his own fault, where he had possession in bad faith. If,
however, he has been a possessor in good faith, no account is taken of
the profits which were consumed or not collected; although after the
action has been instituted an account is taken of those not collected
through the fault of the possessor, or of those which were collected and
consumed.

\(3) If the action is for production, it is not sufficient for the party
who is sued to produce the property, but he is required to produce its
condition also, that is to say, he must place the plaintiff in the same
position which he would have occupied if the property had been produced
when he first brought suit for its production; and therefore if on
account of delay title to said property by usucaption had been obtained
by the possessor, he will, nevertheless have judgment rendered against
him.

Moreover, the judge ought to take account of the profits of the
intermediate time, that is of those which have accrued after issue was
joined in the suit for production, and before a decision has been
rendered.

But if the defendant in the action for production states that he cannot
produce the property at present, and asks for time for the purpose of
doing so, and he appears to make the request without any intention to
deceive, it should be granted him, provided he gives security that he
will surrender the property. But if he neither produces the property
immediately in compliance with the order of court, nor furnishes
security that he will do so afterwards, he should have judgment rendered
against him for such an amount as the plaintiff would be entitled to if
it had been produced in the beginning.^1^

\(4) Where the action is in partition, the judge should assign each
individual piece of property to a separate heir; and if his decision
appears to confer an advantage on any particular heir, he should as has
already been stated, condemn him to pay his co-heir a specified sum of
money by way of compensation. A party should also have judgment rendered
against him in favor of his co-heir for this same reason, when he alone
has collected the profits of the hereditary estate, or ruined or
consumed any property belonging to the same. These rules are also
applicable when there are several co-heirs, or when there are only two.

\(5) They also apply where an action is brought for the division of
property held in common, and several articles are involved; but where
only one thing is concerned, as, for instance, a tract of land, and the
said tract can conveniently be divided into several parts, he ought to
assign a portion of the same to each of the joint owners; and if the
share of one of them seems to be excessive, he should be ordered to pay
a certain sum of money to the other by way of compensation. Where,
however, the property cannot be conveniently divided, or the subject of
controversy is perchance either a slave or a mule, then the whole must
be adjudged to one party, and he should be ordered to pay a certain sum
of money to the other as an equivalent.

\(6) Where suit is brought for the establishment of boundaries, the
judge should determine whether an adjudication is necessary; and indeed
it is necessary in only one instance, that is when it is more convenient
for the fields to be divided by more definite boundaries than those by
which they were formerly distinguished; for then it is necessary that a
part of the land of one should be adjudged to the owner of another
tract; in which case it is proper that he should be condemned to pay a
certain sum of money to the other. On the same principle, likewise, a
party should be required to pay damages in this action, that is when he
happens to have maliciously committed some act with reference to the
boundaries; for example, where he has stolen the boundary stone, or cut
down the trees marking the boundaries. A party is also condemned in an
action of this kind because of contumacy, as, for instance, where he did
not permit land to be measured when ordered to do so by the judge.

\(7) Whatever is adjudicated to anyone in cases of this description
immediately becomes the property of him to whom it is awarded.

^1^ The qualifications of a judge have been succinctly set forth as
follows: "*Judex habere debet duos sales; salem sapientise, ne sit
insipidus, et salem conscien\* tiæ, ne sit diabolus.*"  ED.

TITLE XVIII. CONCERNING PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS.

Public prosecutions are neither maintained by actions nor do they bear
any resemblance whatever to the other proceedings of which We have
treated; and a great difference exists between them both in their
institution and in their procedure.

\(1) They are called public because, generally speaking, they can be
inaugurated by any one of the people.

\(2) Some public prosecutions are capital and some are not. We call
those capital which subject the offender to the extreme penalty, or with
interdiction from fire and water, or with banishment, or with labor in
the mines; the others which inflict infamy along with a pecuniary
penalty are public but not capital.

\(3) The following are public prosecutions. The *Lex Julia* relating to
treason, whose force is directed against those who have plotted anything
against the Emperor or the State; the penalty of which involves loss of
life, and even after death the memory of the culprit is rendered
infamous.

\(4) Also the *Lex Julia* concerning the repression of adultery, which
punishes capitally not only such as pollute the marriage-bed of others,
but also those who dare to practice an abominable crime with persons of
the male sex. By this same *Lex Julia* the crime of seduction is also
punished, when anyone without the employment of force debauches a virgin
or a widow living a virtuous life. This law imposes on offenders, if
they are of honorable rank, the penalty of confiscation of half their
property; and if they are of inferior station, corporeal punishment in
addition to banishment.

\(5) Also, the *Lex Cornelia de Sicariis* which pursues with the
avenging sword persons guilty of homicide, or those who go about with
missile weapons for the purpose of killing men. The words "missile
weapon", as Our Gaius explained in writing, in his interpretation of the
Law of the Twelve Tables, are ordinarily employed to indicate what is
shot from a bow, and also signify everything dispatched by anyone's
hand; it follows therefore that a stone and a piece of wood or iron are
also embraced in this definition. It is derived from the fact that it is
thrown to a distance, being formed from the Greek word thlou. We can
also find this signification in the Greek term for what we designate
*telum* they call beloV from ballesqai*. *This Xenophon explains, for he
he writes as follows: "All at once were cast missiles, spears, arrows,
stones, for slings, and other stones". *Sicarii *get their name from
*sica*, which means an iron knife. Under this same law poisoners are
condemned to death, who have killed men by odious arts, either by poison
or by magic formulas, or have publicly sold injurious drugs.

\(6) Still another law, styled *Lex Pompeia de parricidiis* inflicts a
novel punishment, for a most horrible crime; as it provides that anyone
who has hastened the death of a parent, a child, or any relative
included in the definition of parricide, whether he has ventured to do
so secretly or openly; and, moreover, anyone by whose wicked artifices
the act has been accomplished; or anyone who is aware of the crime,

even though he may be a stranger, shall be punished with the penalty of
parricide; but not by the sword, or by fire, or by any other ordinary
penalty, but he shall be sewed up in a sack with a dog, a cock, a viper,
and an ape, and enclosed within these narrow and fatal limits shall be
thrown either into the neighboring sea or into a stream, according as
the nature of the region admits; in order that while living he may begin
to lose the use of all the elements, that he may be deprived of the air
while still living, and of the earth when he is dead. Where anyone kills
other persons connected with him by consanguinity or affinity, he shall
suffer the penalty of the *Lex Cornelia* concerning assassins.

\(7) Moreover, the *Lex Cornelia* concerning forgery, also styled the
*Lex Cornelia* concerning wills, punishes him who has written, sealed,
read, or substituted a forged will or any other instrument, or has made,
engraved or impressed a false seal, knowingly and fraudulently. The
penalty of this law in the case of slaves is death (which is also that
of the *Lex Cornelia* concerning assassins and poisoners), and where
freemen are concerned it is deportation.

\(8) Moreover, the *Lex Julia* relating to public or private violence
applies to those who whether armed or unarmed commit violence. If armed
force is proved, deportation is inflicted in compliance with the *Lex
Julia de vi publica;* but where force is employed without arms, the
penalty of confiscation of a third part of the property of the culprit
is imposed. Where, however, rape with violence has been perpetrated upon
a virgin, a widow, a nun, or any other woman, then the offenders as well
as those who have aided in the crime are capitally punished, according
to the terms of Our Constitution, from which it is possible to obtain
further information upon this subject.

\(9) The *Lex Julia* concerning peculation punishes those who have
stolen money or property belonging to the State, or which is sacred or
religious; but where judges themselves appropriate public money during
their term of office they undergo capital punishment; and not only they,
but also those who have assisted them in doing so, or have knowingly
received the stolen property from them. Others, however, who break this
law are subjected to the penalty of deportation.

\(10) Among the public prosecutions is likewise the *Lex Fabia *relating
to kidnappers, which sometimes imposes the punishment of death, and
sometimes inflicts a lighter penalty, as provided by the Sacred
Constitutions.

\(11) There are moreover such public prosecutions as those under the
*Lex Julia* concerning corruption in elections; the *Lex Julia *against
judicial extortion; the *Lex Julia* concerning those who artificially or
fraudulently raise the price of grain; and the *Lex Julia *concerning
the embezzlement of public money; which have reference to certain
particular acts and do not inflict loss of life, but subject those who
violate their provisions to other penalties.

\(12) We have explained these matters relating to public prosecutions so
that it may be possible for you to touch them with the tip of your
finger, and, as it were, by way of index. A better knowledge of them may
be obtained by you, God willing, by consulting Our more extensive work,
the Digest or Pandects.

END OF THE INSTITUTES.

* * * * *
